Aboriginal land rights in Australia are the special set of rights given to Indigenous Australians to own land .
There are many different types of land rights laws .
They all allow the government to grant land to indigenous ( native ) Australians under many different conditions ( terms ) .
Land rights schemes are in place in the Northern Territory , Queensland , New South Wales , South Australia , and Victoria .
Under these laws , the title to the land is normally given to a community or ethnic group , not an individual .
Usually , land that has been granted in a land rights claim can not be sold , traded , or mortgaged .
Grants will be normally require that the land be passed down to future generations through inheritance .
The passing of Aboriginal land rights laws in Australia was caused by many important Aboriginal protests .
It was not until the 1970s , though , that there came an organised movement for the recognition of Aboriginal land rights .
On 1 May 1946 , more than 800 Aboriginal stockmen in the Pilbara region of Western Australia went on strike .
They demanded wages for their work .
They were joined by other Aboriginal workers from the towns of Port Hedland and Marble Bar .
The strike ended in 1949 .
In 1963 , the government turned part of the Yolngu people 's traditional lands ( in Arnhem Land ) into a bauxite mine .
The Yolngu started a petition ( now called the Yirrkala bark petitions ) to demand the rights to these lands .
The petition was turned into a legal case .
Mining went ahead anyway , and the legal case went on for 41 years .
The Yolngu were finally made a part of the agreement between the government and the mining company in 2011 .
In 1964 and 1965 , students from the University of Sydney formed a group called the Student Action for Aboriginals .
They traveled into New South Wales country towns to research segregation between native and non-native people .
They led protests to get people to know about the issue of Aboriginal civil rights .
It became known as the Freedom Ride movement .
At the time , Aboriginal people were not counted in the census and their civil rights were different to white citizens .
This changed in 1967 , when a referendum gave Aborigines the same rights as white Australians .
The Wave Hill walkoff was in August 1966 .
A total of 200 Gurindji stockmen and servants at Wave Hill cattle station went on strike to demand wages and the return of some of their traditional lands .
The strike went for nine years .
The demand was not met , but the Gurindji stayed camped on their traditional country .
They chose to break the state 's law but obey their own .
It raised popular support for Aboriginal land rights .
Supporters in the cities rallied for the Gurindji and eventually they won title to part of their land .
