In theory , absolute zero is the temperature where the particles of matter stop moving .
Absolute zero is impossible to achieve , because all particles move , even if it is just a small vibration .
Some people have created temperatures very close to absolute zero , but the record temperature was 100 pK ( Picokelvin ) above absolute zero .
Even getting close to absolute zero is difficult because anything that touches an object being cooled near absolute zero would give heat to the objects .
Scientists use lasers to slow atoms when cooling objects to very low temperatures .
The Kelvin and Rankine temperature scales are defined so that absolute zero is 0 kelvins ( K ) or 0 degrees Rankine ( ° R ) .
The Celsius and Fahrenheit scales are defined so that absolute zero is − 273.15 ° C or − 459.67 ° F. At this stage the pressure of the particles is zero .
If we plot a graph to it , we can see that the temperature of the particles is zero .
The temperature can not go down any further .
Also , the particles can not move in `` reverse '' either because as the movement of particles is vibration , vibrating in reverse would be nothing but simply vibrating again .
The closer the temperature of an object gets to absolute zero , the less resistive the material is to electricity therefore it will conduct electricity almost perfectly , with no measurable resistance .
The Third Law of Thermodynamics says that nothing can ever have a temperature of absolute zero .
The Second Law of Thermodynamics says that all engines that are powered by heat ( like car engines and steam train engines ) must release waste heat and ca n't be 100 % efficient .
This is because the efficiency ( percent of energy the engine uses up that is actually used to do the engine 's job ) is 100 % × ( 1-Toutside\/Tinside ) , which only is 100 % if the outside temperature is absolute zero which it ca n't be .
So , an engine ca n't be 100 % efficient , but you can make its efficiency closer to 100 % by making the inside temperature hotter and\/or the outside temperature colder .
