Absolute zero is the theoretical temperature at which entropy reaches its minimum value .
The laws of thermodynamics state that absolute zero can not be reached using only thermodynamic means .
A system at absolute zero still possesses quantum mechanical zero-point energy , the energy of its ground state .
The kinetic energy of the ground state can not be removed .
However , in the classical interpretation it is zero and the thermal energy of matter vanishes .
The zero point of any thermodynamic temperature scale , such as Kelvin or Rankine , is set at absolute zero .
By international agreement , absolute zero is defined as 0K on the Kelvin scale and as − 273.15 ° on the Celsius scale .
This equates to − 459.67 ° on the Fahrenheit scale and 0 R on the Rankine scale .
Scientists have achieved temperatures very close to absolute zero , where matter exhibits quantum effects such as superconductivity and superfluidity .
One of the first to discuss the possibility of an absolute minimal temperature was Robert Boyle .
His 1665 New Experiments and Observations touching Cold , articulated the dispute known as the primum frigidum .
The concept was well known among naturalists of the time .
Some contended an absolute minimum temperature occurred within earth ( as one of the four so-called `` elements '' ) , others within water , others air , and some more recently within nitre .
But all of them seemed to agree that , `` There is some body or other that is of its own nature supremely cold and by participation of which all other bodies obtain that quality . ''
The question whether there is a limit to the degree of cold possible , and , if so , where the zero must be placed , was first addressed by the French physicist Guillaume Amontons in 1702 , in connection with his improvements in the air thermometer .
In his instrument , temperatures were indicated by the height at which a column of mercury was sustained by a certain mass of air , the volume , or `` spring '' , of which varied with the heat to which it was exposed .
Amontons therefore argued that the zero of his thermometer would be that temperature at which the spring of the air in it was reduced to nothing .
On the scale he used , the boiling-point of water was marked at +73 and the melting-point of ice at 51 , so that the zero of his scale was equivalent to about − 240 on the Celsius scale .
This close approximation to the modern value of − 273.15 ° C for the zero of the air-thermometer was further improved upon in 1779 by Johann Heinrich Lambert , who observed that − 270 ° C might be regarded as absolute cold .
Values of this order for the absolute zero were not , however , universally accepted about this period .
Pierre-Simon Laplace and Antoine Lavoisier , in their 1780 treatise on heat , arrived at values ranging from 1,500 to 3,000 below the freezing-point of water , and thought that in any case it must be at least 600 below .
John Dalton in his Chemical Philosophy gave ten calculations of this value , and finally adopted − 3000 ° C as the natural zero of temperature .
After James Prescott Joule had determined the mechanical equivalent of heat , Lord Kelvin approached the question from an entirely different point of view , and in 1848 devised a scale of absolute temperature which was independent of the properties of any particular substance and was based solely on the fundamental laws of thermodynamics .
It followed from the principles on which this scale was constructed that its zero was placed at − 273.15 ° C , at almost precisely the same point as the zero of the air-thermometer .
