The 2007 enlargement of the European Union saw Bulgaria and Romania join the European Union ( EU ) on 1 January 2007 .
It was the latest expansion of the EU , though considered by the European Commission as part of the same wave ( the fifth ) as the 2004 enlargement .
Romania was the first country of post-communist Europe to have official relations with the European Community .
In 1974 , a treaty included Romania in the Community 's Generalized System of Preferences .
Since the Romanian Revolution of 1989 , European Union ( EU ) membership has been the main goal of every Romanian Government and practically every Politics of Romania  political party in Romania ) ) .
Romania signed its Europe Agreement in 1993 , and submitted its official application for membership in the EU in 1995 , the third of the post-communist European countries to do so after Hungary and Poland .
Along with its official EU application , Romania submitted the `` Snagov Declaration '' , signed by all fourteen major political parties declaring their full support for EU membership .
During the 2000s , Romania implemented a number of reforms to prepare for EU accession , including the consolidation of its democratic systems , the institution of the rule of law , the acknowledgement of respect for human rights , the commitment to personal freedom of expression , and the implementation of a functioning free-market economy .
The objective of joining the EU has also influenced Romania 's regional relations .
As a result , Romania has imposed visa regimes on a number of states , including Russia , Ukraine , Belarus , Serbia , Montenegro , Turkey and Moldova .
Within the framework of integration meetings held between the EU member states and Bulgaria , an ` Association Committee ' was held on 22 June 2004 .
It confirmed overall good progress for the preparation of accession ; however , it highlighted the need for further reform of Bulgaria 's judicial structures , particularly in its pre-trial phases , as well as the need for further efforts to fight against political corruption and organized crime , including human trafficking .
There was also , according to the report , limited progress regarding the integration of the Roma community .
The findings were reflected in the 2004 Regular Report .
The Brussels European Council of December 17 2004 confirmed the conclusion of accession negotiations with Bulgaria .
The 26 September 2006 monitoring report of the European Commission confirmed the date once more , also announcing that Bulgaria and Romania would meet no direct restrictions , but progress in certain areas - reforms of the judicial system , elimination of corruption and the struggle against organized crime - would be strictly monitored .
With this accession , Cyrillic became the third official alphabet of the EU , after the Latin and Greek alphabets .
Cyrillic will also be featured on the euro banknotes and the national ( obverse ) side of the Bulgarian euro coins .
For details , see Linguistic issues concerning the euro .
