Acherontia atropos is the most widely-known of the three species of Death 's - head Hawk moth .
Acherontia species are notorious mainly for a vaguely skull-shaped pattern on the thorax .
Acherontia atropos is a large hawk moth with a wingspan of 90-130 mm ( about 3.5 to 5 inches ) , being the largest moth in some of the regions in which it occurs .
The adult has the typical streamlined wings and body of the hawk moth family , Sphingidae .
The upper wings are brown with slight yellow wavy lines ; the lower wings are yellow with some wide brown waves .
It rests during the day on trees or in the litter , holding the wings like a tent over the body .
The moth also has numerous other unusual features .
It has the ability to emit a loud squeak if irritated .
The sound is produced by expelling air from its proboscis .
It often accompanies this sound with flashing its brightly marked abdomen in a further attempt to deter its predators .
It is commonly observed raiding beehives for honey at night .
Unlike the other species of Acherontia , it only attacks colonies of the well-known Western honey bee , Apis mellifera .
It is attacked by guard bees at the entrance , but the thick cuticle and resistance to venom allow it to enter the hive .
It is able to move about in hives unmolested because it mimics the scent of the bees .
The British entomological journal Atropos takes its name from this species .
The species name Atropos is related to death , derived from atropos that may not be turned , from a-1 + - tropos ( Greek : τρόπος ) from trepein to turn .
Atropos was one of the three Moirai , goddesses of fate and destiny .
In addition the genus name Acherontia is derived from Acheron , a river in Greece , which in Greek mythology was known as the river of pain , and was one of the five rivers of the Greek underworld .
Acherontia atropos occurs throughout the Middle East and the Mediterranean region , much of Africa down to the southern tip , and increasingly as far north as southern Great Britain due to recently mild British winters .
It occurs as far east as India and western Saudi Arabia , and as far west as the Canary Islands and Azores .
It invades western Eurasia frequently , although few individuals successfully overwinter .
There are several generations of Acherontia atropos per year , with continuous broods in Africa .
In the northern parts of its range the species overwinters in the pupal stage .
Eggs are laid singly under old leaves of Solanaceae : potato especially , but also Physalis and other nightshades .
However it also has been recorded on members of the Verbenaceae , e.g. Lantana , and on members of the families Cannabaceae , Oleaceae , and others .
The larvae are stout with a posterior horn , as is typical of larvae of the Sphingidae .
Most sphingid larvae however , have fairly smooth posterior horns , possibly with a simple curve , either upward or downward .
In contrast , Acherontia species and certain relatives bear a posterior horn embossed with round projections about the thicker part .
The horn itself bends downwards near the base , but curls upwards towards the tip .
The newly-hatched larva starts out a light shade of green but darkens after feeding , with yellow stripes diagonally on the sides .
In the second instar , it has thorn-like horns on the back .
In the third instar , purple or blue edging develops on the yellow stripes and the tail horn turns from black to yellow .
In the final instar , the thorns disappear and the larva may adopt one of three color morphs : green , brown , or yellow .
Larvae do not move much , and will click their mandibles or even bite if threatened , though the bite is effectively harmless to the human skin .
The larva grows to about 120-130 mm , and pupates in an underground chamber .
The pupa is smooth and glossy with the proboscis fused to the body , as in most Lepidoptera .
In spite of the fact that Acherontia atropos is perfectly harmless except as a minor pest to crops and to beehives , the fancied skull pattern has burdened the moth with a negative reputation , such as associations with the supernatural and evil .
There are numerous superstitions to the effect that the moth brings bad luck to the house into which it flies , and that death or grave misfortune may be expected to follow .
More prosaically , in South Africa at least , uninformed people have claimed that the moth has a poisonous , often fatal , sting ( possibly referring mainly to the proboscis , but sometimes to the horn on the posterior of the larva ) .
Acherontia atropos has been featured in art ( notably in The Hireling Shepherd ) , Bram Stoker 's `` Dracula '' and in movies , notably in Un chien andalou and the promotional marquee posters for The Silence of the Lambs .
In the latter film the moth is used as a calling card by the serial killer `` Buffalo Bill '' , though the movie script refers to Acherontia styx , and the moths that appear in the film are Acherontia atropos .
In The Mothman Prophecies this moth is referred to .
It also appears in the music video to Massive Attack 's single , `` Butterfly Caught . ''
The Death 's - head moth is mentioned in Susan Hill 's gothic horror novel , I 'm the King of the Castle as it is used to instil fear in one of the young protagonists .
John Keats mentioned the moth as a symbol of death in his Ode to Melancholy , `` Make not your rosary of yew-berries , \/ Nor let the beetle , nor the death-moth be \/ Your mournful Psyche '' .
In José Saramago 's novel Death With Interruptions , Acherontia atropos appears on the American edition 's cover , and is a topic that two characters mull over .
