Other major sub-schools of Vedānta are Viśishṭādvaita and Dvaita ; while the minor ones include Suddhadvaita , Dvaitadvaita and Achintya Bhedabheda .
Advaita ( literally , non-duality ) is a system of thought where `` Advaita '' refers to the identity of the Self ( Atman ) and the Whole ( Brahman ) .
Recognition of this identity leads to liberation .
Attaining this liberation takes a long preparation and training under the guidance of a guru .
The key source texts for all schools of Vedānta are the Prasthanatrayi-the canonical texts consisting of the Upanishads , the Bhagavad Gita and the Brahma Sutras .
The first person to explicitly consolidate the principles of Advaita Vedanta was Shankara Bhagavadpada , while the first historical proponent was Gaudapada , the guru of Shankara 's guru Govinda Bhagavatpada .
According to Adi Śankara , knowledge of Brahman springs from inquiry into the words of the Upanişads , and the knowledge of Brahman that Sruti provides can not be obtained in any other way .
Advaitins believe that suffering is due to Maya ( also known as Mithya or Vaitathya ) , and only knowledge ( called Jnana ) of Brahman can destroy Maya .
When Maya is removed , there exists ultimately no difference between the Jiva and Brahman ( Isvara ) .
Such a state of bliss when achieved while living is called Jivanmukta .
While one is in the pragmatic level , one can worship God in any way and in any form , like Krishna or Ayyappa as he wishes ; Adi Shankara himself was a proponent of devotional worship or Bhakti .
But Adi Shankara taught that while Vedic sacrifices , puja and devotional worship can lead one in the direction of jnana ( true knowledge ) they can not lead one directly to moksha .
At best , they can serve as means to obtain moksha via shukla gati .
Mahavakya , or `` the great sentences '' , state the unity of Brahman and Atman .
There are many such sentences in the Vedas , however only one such sentence from each of the four Vedas is usually chosen .
They are shown below .
According to Śankara and others , anyone seeking to follow the philosophy of Advaita Vedānta must do so under the guidance of a Guru ( teacher ) .
It is the teacher who through exegesis of Sruti and skillful handling of words generates a hitherto unknown knowledge in the disciple .
The teacher does not merely provide stimulus or suggestion .
The Guru must have the following qualities ( see Mundaka Upanishad 1.2.12 ) : 1 ) Śrotriya - must be learned in the Vedic scriptures and Sampradaya 2 ) Brahmaniṣṭhā - literally meaning ` established in Brahman ' ; must have realized the oneness of Brahman in everything , and in himself\/herself .
The seeker must serve the Guru , and submit questions with all humility in order to remove all doubts ( see Bhagavad Gita 4.34 ) .
By doing so , Advaita says , the seeker will attain Moksha ( ` liberation from the cycle of births and deaths ' ) .
In the Indian religious and philosophical traditions , all knowledge is traced back to the Gods and to the Rishi who `` saw '' the Vedas .
The following well known Sanskrit Verse among Smarthas provides the list of the early teachers of the Vedanta in their order , The paramparā lists , in order , Daiva-paramparā .
Nārāyaṇa .
Padmabhuva ( Brahmā ) Ṛṣi-paramparā .
Vaśiṣṭha .
Śakti .
Parāśara .
Vyāsa .
Śuka .
Mānava-paramparā .
Gauḍapāda .
Govinda bhagavatpāda .
Śankara bhagavatpāda , and then Sankara 's four disciples .
Padmapāda .
Hastāmalaka .
Toṭaka .
Vārtikakāra ( Sureśvara ) and others .
According to Adi Shankara , God , the Supreme Cosmic Spirit or Brahman is the One , the whole and the only reality ( Paramarthika Satyam ) .
Other than Brahman , everything else , including the universe , material objects and individuals , are false .
Brahman is at best described as that infinite , omnipresent , omnipotent , incorporeal , impersonal , transcendent reality that is the divine ground of all Being .
Brahman is often described as neti neti meaning `` not this , not this '' because Brahman can not be correctly described as this or that .
In fact , Brahman can never be known as an object of experience because it is the very subject that experiences everything .
` It ' ( grammatically neutral , but exceptionally treated as masculine ) is the origin of this and that , the origin of forces , substances , all of existence , the undefined , the basis of all , unborn , the essential truth , unchanging , eternal , the absolute .
How can it be properly described as something in the material world when itself is the basis of reality ?
Brahman is also beyond the senses , it would be akin a blind man trying to correctly describe color .
It , though not necessarily a form of physical matter , is the substrate of the material world , which in turn is its illusory transformation .
Brahman is not the effect of the world , but its very cause .
Brahman is said to be the purest knowledge itself , and is illuminant like a source of infinite light .
Due to ignorance ( avidyā ) , the Brahman is visible as the material world and its objects ( nama rupa vikara ) .
The actual Brahman is attributeless and formless ( see Nirguna Brahman ) .
It is the Self-existent , the Absolute and the Imperishable .
Brahman is actually indescribable .
It is at best Satchidananda ( merging `` Sat '' + `` Chit '' + `` Ananda '' , i.e. , Infinite Truth , Infinite Consciousness and Infinite Bliss ) .
Also , Brahman is free from any kind of differences or differentiation .
It does not have any sajātīya ( homogeneous ) differentiation because there is no second Brahman .
It does not have any vijātīya ( heterogeneous ) differentiation because there is nobody in reality existing other than Brahman .
It has neither svagata ( internal ) differences , because Brahman is itself homogeneous .
Adi Shankara also proposed some logical proofs : Shruti - the Upanishads and the Brahma Sutras describe Brahman in almost exact manner as Adi Shankara .
This is the testimonial proof of Brahman .
Psychological - every person experiences his soul , or atman .
According to Adi Shankara , Atman = Brahman .
This argument also proves the omniscience of the Brahman .
Essential - Brahman is the basis of this created world .
Perceptible feeling - many people , when they achieve the turīya state , claim that their soul has become one with everything else .
Georg Feuerstein summarizes the advaita realization as follows : Īsvara ( pronounced ( ˈiːʃvərə ) , literally , the Lord ) Parama Īshvara means `` The Supreme Lord '' - According to Advaita Vedanta , when man tries to know the attributeless Brahman with his mind , under the influence of Maya , Brahman becomes the Lord .
Isvara is Brahman with Maya - the manifested form of Brahman .
Adi Shankara uses a metaphor that when the `` reflection '' of the Cosmic Spirit falls upon the mirror of Maya , it appears as the Ishvara or Supreme Lord .
The Ishvara is true only in the pragmatic level .
God 's actual form in the transcendental level is the Cosmic Spirit .
Ishvara can be described as Saguna Brahman or Brahman with attributes that may be regarded to have a personality with human and Godly attributes .
This concept of Ishvara is also used to visualize and worship in anthropomorphic form deities such as Shiva , Vishnu or Devi by the dvaitins which leads to immense confusion in the understanding of a monistic concept of God apart from polytheistic worship of Vishnu , Shiva and Shakti in Hinduism .
Now the question arises as to why the Ishvara created the world .
If one assumes that Ishvara creates the world for any incentive , this slanders the wholeness and perfection of Ishvara .
For example , if one assumes that Ishvara creates the world for gaining something , it would be against His perfection .
If we assume that He creates for compassion , it would be illogical , because the emotion of compassion can not arise in a blank and void world in the beginning ( when only Ishvara existed ) .
So Adi Shankara assumes that Creation is recreation or play of Ishvara .
It is His nature , just as it is man 's nature to breathe .
The sole proof for Ishvara that Adi Shankara gives is Shruti 's mentions of Ishvara , as Ishvara is beyond logic and thinking .
This is similar to Kant 's philosophy about Ishvara in which he says that `` faith '' is the basis of theism .
However , Adi Shankara has also given few other logical proofs for Ishvara , but warning us not to completely rely on them : The world is a work , an effect , and so must have real cause .
This cause must be Ishvara .
The world has a wonderful unity , coordination and order , so its creator must have been an intelligent being .
People do good and sinful work and get its fruits , either in this life or after .
People themselves can not be the giver of their fruits , as no one would give himself the fruit of his sin .
Also , this giver can not be an unconscious object .
So the giver of the fruits of Karma is Ishvara .
See , Karma in Hinduism for more information .
To think that there is no place for a personal God ( Ishvara ) in Advaita Vedanta is a misunderstanding of the philosophy .
Ishvara is , in an ultimate sense , described as `` false '' because Brahman appears as Ishvara only due to the curtain of Maya .
However , as described earlier , just as the world is true in the pragmatic level , similarly , Ishvara is also pragmatically true .
Just as the world is not absolutely false , Ishvara is also not absolutely false .
He is the distributor of the fruits of one 's Karma .
Whenever we talk about Brahman , we are in fact talking about God .
God is the highest knowledge theoretically possible .
Devotion ( Bhakti ) will cancel the effects of bad Karma and will bring a person closer to the true knowledge by purifying his mind .
Slowly , the difference between the worshipper and the worshipped decreases and upon true knowledge , liberation occurs .
He wrote commentaries on the Prasthana Trayi .
His main works are the commentaries on the Prasthanatrayi ( Brahma Sūtras , Bhagavad Gītā and the Upanishads ) and the Gaudapadiya Karikas .
He also wrote a major independent treatise , called `` Upadeśa Sāhasrī '' , expounding his philosophy .
The following well-known quote from Vivekacūḍāmaṇi , one of his Prakaraṇa graṃthas ( philosophical treatises ) succinctly summarizes his philosophy : In his metaphysics , there are three tiers of reality with each one more real than the previous .
The category illusion in this system is unreal only from the viewpoint of the absolutely real and is different from the category of the Absolutely unreal .
His system of vedanta introduced the method of scholarly exegesis on the accepted metaphysics of the Upanishads , and this style was adopted by all the later vedanta schools .
Another distinctive feature of his work is his refusal to be literal about scriptural statements and adoption of symbolic interpretation where he considered it appropriate .
In a famous passage in his commentary on the Brahmasutra 's of Badarayana , he says .
Adi Sankara founded four Maṭhas ( Sanskrit : मठ ) to preserve and develop his philosophies , one each in the north , south , east and west of the Indian subcontinent , each headed by one of his direct disciples .
The current heads of the mathas trace their authority back to these figures , and each of the heads of these four mathas takes the title of Shankaracharya ( `` the learned Shankara '' ) after Adi Sankara .
The table below gives an overview of the four Amnaya Mathas founded by Adi Shankara and their details .
According to the tradition in Kerala , after Sankara 's samadhi at Vadakkunnathan Temple his disciples founded four mathas in Thrissur , namely Naduvil Madhom , Thekke Madhom , Idayil Madhom and Vadakke Madhom .
