The Aldeburgh Festival is an English arts festival devoted mainly to classical music .
It takes place each June in the Aldeburgh area of Suffolk , centred on the main concert hall at Snape Maltings .
In 2007 , the festival expanded to include the Faster Than Sound series which highlights experimental and electronic music , and 2010 saw the addition of yet another independent music event , TEDxAldeburgh .
The Festival was founded in 1948 by the composer Benjamin Britten , the singer Peter Pears and the librettist Eric Crozier .
The original intention was to provide a home for their opera company , the English Opera Group , but the vision was soon widened to include readings of poetry , literature , drama , lectures and exhibitions of art .
The first festival was held from the 5 June 1948 to the 13 June 1948 and used the Aldeburgh Jubilee Hall , a few doors away from Britten 's house in Crabbe Street , as its main venue .
It featured a performance of Albert Herring by the English Opera Group ; Britten 's newly-written St. Nicolas cantata , op .42 ; and performances by Clifford Curzon and the Zorian String Quartet .
Over the years the festival grew and took in additional venues such as Aldeburgh 's fifteenth-century church of Saint Peter and Saint Paul and venues in nearby Orford , Blythburgh and Framlingham .
In the mid-1960s the Festival gained a new and much larger concert hall with the conversion of Snape Maltings , which includes one of the largest mid nineteenth century barley malthouses in East Anglia .
Most of the building 's original character , such as the distinctive square malthouse roof-vents , was retained .
The new concert hall was opened by the Queen on 2 June 1967 , at the start of the twentieth Aldeburgh Festival .
Two years later , on the first night of the 1969 festival , the concert hall was destroyed by fire .
Only the shell of the outer walls remained .
For that year the Festival was moved to other local venues but by the following year the hall had been rebuilt and once again it was opened by the Queen , this time at the start of the 1970 festival .
The festival is now operated by Aldeburgh Music , which also runs the Britten-Pears Young Artist Programme ( formerly the Britten-Pears School for Advanced Musical Studies ) , Aldeburgh Residencies - a program offering bespoke training and development opportunities to UK and international artists - as well as an extensive education program .
Aldeburgh 's artist development programs feed heavily into the June festival and other events throughout the year .
The Aldeburgh Festival retains a unique character , mostly due to its location in rural Suffolk .
It also continues to emphasise the presentation of new music , new interpretations and the rediscovery of forgotten music .
It has seen the premières of several works by Britten ( A Midsummer Night 's Dream in 1960 ; Death in Venice in 1973 ) and also Harrison Birtwistle 's Punch and Judy in 1968 , The Io Passion in 2004 and The Corridor in 2009 .
The Festival now takes place in several buildings on the new Creative Campus at Snape Maltings , using the newly refurbished industrial buildings as well as the world renowned Snape Maltings Concert Hall .
The new Hoffmann Building , which contains The Britten Studio as another performance space also doubles as a recording studio , as well as the Jerwood Kiln Studio , a rehearsal and recording space .
The Festival 's current Artistic Director is the French pianist Pierre-Laurent Aimard .
Faster Than Sound has been part of the Aldeburgh Festival since 2007 .
Initially hosted at Bentwaters airbase , it has included artists such as Luke Vibert , Tansy Davies , Mira Calix , Anna Meredith , Venetian Snares and many others .
The inaugural TEDxAldeburgh was held on November 6 , 2010 .
Hosted by the TED music director Thomas Dolby and organized by Joana Seguro on behalf of Aldeburgh Music ( coincidentally , Thomas Dolby 's great-great-grandfather actually built the maltings building at Snape that houses the Britten Studio , which was this year 's venue ) .
TEDxAldeburgh included talks from David Toop , Tod Machover , Martyn Ware , William Orbit , and composer Nick Ryan , and performances from Peter Gregson , Tim Exile , and Imogen Heap .
In addition , TED talk videos from David Byrne , Itay Talgam , Evelyn Glennie , and Benjamin Zander .
