An archivist ( `` AR-kiv-ist '' or `` AR-kive-ist '' ) is a professional who assesses , collects , organizes , preserves , maintains control over , and provides access to information determined to have long-term value .
The information maintained by an archivist can be any form of media ( photographs , video or sound recordings , letters , documents , electronic records , etc. ) .
As Richard Pearce-Moses wrote , `` Archivists keep records that have enduring value as reliable memories of the past , and they help people find and understand the information they need in those records . ''
Determining what records have enduring value can be challenging .
Archivists must also select records valuable enough to justify the costs of storage and preservation , plus the labor intensive expenses of arrangement , description , and reference service .
The theory and scholarly work underpinning archives practices is called archival science .
Archivists ' duties include acquiring and appraising new collections , arranging and describing records , providing reference service , and preserving materials .
In arranging records , archivists apply two important principles : provenance and original order , sometimes referred to as respect des fonds .
Provenance refers to the origin of records , essentially who created them .
Many entities create records , including government , businesses , universities , and personal collections of individuals .
The idea of respect des fonds is applied by keeping records in their original order as established and maintained by the creator ( s ) .
This also means that records from one corporate body should not be mixed with records from another .
There are two aspects to arrangement : intellectual and physical .
Both aspects follow the principle of original order .
Archivists process the records physically by placing them in folders and boxes , usually acid free to ensure their long-term survival .
They also process the records intellectually , by determining what the records consist of , how they are organized , and what - if any - finding aids need to be created .
Finding aids can be box lists or descriptive inventories , or indexes .
If the original arrangement is unclear or even unhelpful in terms of accessing the collection , it is not usually rearranged to something that makes more sense .
This is because preserving the original order answers the most questions about the collection .
It shows how the creator of the records functioned , why the records were created , and how he went about arranging them .
If the archivist rearranged them , the records would lose the ability to answer these questions .
It would also lose all significance , as the provenance and authenticity of the records may be lost .
However , original order is not always the best way to maintain some collections and archivists must use their own experience and current best practices to determine the correct way to keep collections of mixed media or those lacking a clear original arrangement .
American archivists are also guided in their work by a code of ethics .
Alongside their work behind the scenes arranging and caring for collections , archivists assist users in interpreting collections and answering inquiries .
This reference work can be just part of an archivist 's job in a smaller organization , or consist of most of their occupation in a larger archive where specific roles ( such as processing archivist and reference archivist ) may be delineated .
Archivists work for a variety of organizations , including government agencies , local authorities , museums , hospitals , historical societies , businesses , charities , corporations , colleges and universities , and any institution whose records may potentially be valuable to researchers , exhibitors , genealogists , or others .
Alternatively , they could also work on the collections of a large family or even of an individual .
Applicants for archives jobs usually outnumber positions available .
Archivists are often educators as well ; it is not unusual for an archivist employed at a university or college to lecture in a subject related to their collection .
Archivists employed at cultural institutions or for local government frequently design educational or outreach programs to further the ability of archive users to understand and access information in their collections .
This might include such varied activities as exhibitions , promotional events or even media coverage .
The advent of Encoded Archival Description , along with increasing demand for materials to be made available online , has required archivists to become more tech-savvy in the past decade .
Many archivists are now acquiring basic XML skills in order to make their finding aids available to researchers online .
Because of the varied nature of the job and organizations and work environment , archivists need to have a wide range of skills : Those who work in reference and access-oriented positions need to be good with people , so that they are able to help them with their research .
An ability to apply some basic knowledge of conservation is needed to help extend the useful life of cultural artifacts .
Many different types of media ( such as photographs , acidic papers , and unstable copy processes ) can deteriorate if not stored and maintained properly .
Although many archival collections consist solely of paper records , increasingly archivists must confront the new challenges posed by the preservation of electronic records , so they need to be forward-looking and technologically proficient .
Because of the amount of sorting and listing , they need to be very logical and organised and be able to pay attention to detail .
When cataloging records , or when assisting users , archivists need to have some research skills .
Archivists are occasionally called upon to comment or provide some context for the records in their collection and so should know as much about their collection as possible .
The educational preparation for archivists varies from country to country .
In Colombia , the Universidad de La Salle offers the degree of Professional in Information Systems , Library and Archival Sciences .
It is a vocational training program , within existing legal standards aimed at providing knowledge , skills and abilities required for the design and management of information systems and documentation of various sorts .
Its projection for the future is based on the application of new information technologies and communications for the management of information services economically viable .
The program was created in 1971 .
Other institutions that offers a degree in Archival Science are : Universidad del Quindío - Professional degree : Professional in Information and Documentation , Library and Archival Sciences .
Universidad de Antioquia , Escuela Interamericana de Bibliotecología - Technological degree : Technologist in Archival Science .
Universidad Católica de Manizales - Technological degree : Technologist in Documentation and Archival Science .
Servicio Nacional de Aprendizaje - SENA - in chain training with the Tecnológico de Antioquia ( http \/ \/ : www.plataforma.unipamplona.edu.co\/tda Tecnológico de Antioquia ) - Technical degree : Professional Technical in Archives , Technological degree : Technologist in Documentation and Archival Science .
In France the oldest Archivist School is the École des chartes , founded in 1821 .
This prestigious grande école offers a diploma in `` Archivist-Paleography '' after a three-year curriculum .
A part of its alumni pursue to a State archivist career after a 18 month formation at the Institut national du patrimoine .
Most positions are reserved for European citizens .
Some universities offer Master 's degree in Archival Science : Angers , Caen , Dijon , Lille III , Lyon III , Mulhouse , Versailles Saint-Quentin , In Republic of Ireland , the University College Dublin School of History and Archives offers a Masters of Arts degree in Archives and Records Management , recognized by the Society of Archivists .
In the United Kingdom , there are currently five full - or part-time postgraduate courses in archives administration or management which are recognized by the Archives and Records Association ( United Kingdom and Ireland ) , formerly the Society of Archivists .
Students are expected to have relevant paid or voluntary work experience before obtaining a place on the UK courses ; many undertake a year 's traineeship .
Also , professional certification ( after qualifying ) can be pursued via the Registration Scheme offered by the Society of Archivists .
According to the most recent professional census of American Archivists published , most of those in the United States have earned a Masters degree .
However , the exact type of degree can vary ; the most common sorts of advanced degrees held by archivists are in archival science , public history , history , library science , or library and information science .
It is also possible for archivists to earn a doctorate in library , or library and information , science .
Archivists with a PhD often work at a teaching faculty or deans and directors of archival programs .
In 2002 , the Society of American Archivists published Guidelines for a Graduate Program in Archival Studies , as well as a code of ethics .
Also in the United States , the Academy of Certified Archivists offers supplemental archival training by means of a certification program .
When first established in 1989 , some critics of ACA certification objected to its annual membership fees , the theoretical versus practical nature of its tests , and the need for members to re-certify every five years .
However , in the decades since , it has been agreed that such requirements are comparable with certification programs in other professions , and that certification strengthens professional standards and individual competencies .
While some positions in archives require certification and many employers view certification as preferred , it is not required by all employers in the United States .
Approximately 1,100 archivists were certified by ACA , as of 30 June 2011 .
