Voruzhonnije Síly Rossíyskoj Federátsii ) are the military services of Russia , established after the dissolution of the Soviet Union .
On 7 May 1992 , Boris Yeltsin signed a decree establishing the Russian Ministry of Defense and placing all Soviet Armed Forces troops on the territory of the RSFSR under Russian control .
The commander-in-chief of the armed forces is the president of Russia .
Although the Russian armed forces were formed in 1992 , the Russian military dates its roots back to the times of the Kievan Rus ' .
The number of troops is permitted by decree of the president of Russia .
On 1 January 2008 , a quota of 2,019,629 units , including the military 1,134,800 units , was set .
In 2010 the International Institute for Strategic Studies ( IISS ) estimated that the Russian armed forces numbered about 1,027,000 active troops and in the region of 20,000,000 reserves , ( largely ex-conscripts ) but a significant military reform is underway which will cut the number of active troops .
According to SIPRI , Russia 's annual defense spending stands at about $ 52.7 billion in FY2011 .
As the Soviet Union officially dissolved on December 31 , 1991 , the Soviet military was left in limbo .
For the next year and a half various attempts to keep its unity and transform it into the military of the Commonwealth of Independent States ( CIS ) failed .
Over time , the units stationed in Ukraine and some other breakaway republics swore loyalty to their new national governments , while a series of treaties between the newly independent states divided up the military 's assets .
Apart from assuming control of the bulk of the former Soviet Internal Troops and KGB Border Troops , seemingly the only independent defense move the new Russian leadership made before March 1992 was to announce the creation of a ` National Guard ' , which was eventually superseded by the takeover of the bulk of the former Soviet central defense apparatus .
On 7 May 1992 , Yeltsin appointed himself as the new Russian minister of defense , marking a crucial step in the creation of the new Armed Forces .
By December 1993 CIS military structures had become CIS military cooperation structures with all real influence lost .
In the next few years , Russian forces withdrew from central and eastern Europe , as well as from some newly independent post-Soviet republics .
While in most places the withdrawal took place without any problems , the Russian Armed Forces remained in some disputed areas such as the Sevastopol naval base in the Crimea as well as in Abkhazia and Transnistria .
The Armed Forces have several bases in foreign countries , especially on territory of the former Soviet Republics .
A new military doctrine , promulgated in November 1993 , implicitly acknowledged the contraction of the old Soviet military into a regional military power without global imperial ambitions .
In keeping with its emphasis on the threat of regional conflicts , the doctrine called for a Russian military that is smaller , lighter , and more mobile , with a higher degree of professionalism and with greater rapid deployment capability .
Such change proved extremely difficult to achieve .
Under Defense Minister Pavel Grachev , little military reform took place , though there was a plan to create more deployable Mobile Forces .
Later Defense Minister Rodionov had good qualifications but did not manage to institute lasting change .
Only under Defense Minister Igor Sergeyev did a certain amount of limited reforms begin , though attention was focused upon the Strategic Rocket Forces .
Significant reforms were announced in late 2008 under Defense Minister Anatoliy Serdyukov , and major structural reorganisation began in 2009 .
Key elements of the reforms announced in October 2008 include reducing the armed forces to a strength of one million by 2012 ( planned end-date was 2016 ) ; reducing the number of officers ; centralising officer training from 65 military schools into 10 ` systemic ' military training centres ; reducing the size of the central command ; introducing more civilian logistics and auxiliary staff ; elimination of cadre-strength formations ; reorganising the reserves ; reorganising the army into a brigade system ; and reorganising air forces into an air base system instead of regiments .
The number of military units is to be reduced in accordance with the table : An essential part of the military reform is its down-sizing .
By the beginning of the reform , there were about 1,200,000 active personnel in the Russian army .
Largely , the reductions falls within the officers .
Personnel are to be reduced according to the table : The total number of the officer corps scheduled to reduce from 335 thousand to 150 thousand , but in early February 2011 Defense Minister Anatoly Serdyukov announced the decision to increase officers by 70 000 - to 220 thousand to counteract this .
The Defense Ministry of the Russian Federation serves as the administrative body of the Armed Forces .
Since Soviet times , the General Staff has acted as the main commanding and supervising body of the Russian armed forces : U.S. expert William Odom said in 1998 , that ` the Soviet General Staff without the MoD is conceivable , but the MoD without the General Staff is not . '
However , currently the General Staff 's role is being reduced to that of the Ministry 's department of strategic planning , the Minister himself , currently Anatoliy Serdyukov may now be gaining further executive authority over the troops .
Other departments include the personnel directorate as well as the Rear Services of the Armed Forces of Russia , railroad troops and construction troops .
The Chief of the General Staff is currently General of the Army Nikolai Makarov .
The Russian military is divided into the following branches : the Russian Ground Forces , the Russian Navy , and the Russian Air Force .
There are also three independent arms of service : Strategic Missile Troops , Military Space Forces , and the Russian Airborne Troops .
The Troops of Air Defense , the former Soviet Air Defense Forces , have been subordinated into the Air Force since 1998 .
The Armed Forces as a whole seem to be traditionally referred to as the Army ( armiya ) , except in some cases , the Navy .
As of late 2010 the Ground Forces as well as the Air Forces and Navy are distributed among four military districts : Western Military District , Southern Military District , Central Military District , and the Eastern Military District which also constitute four Joint Strategic Commands - West , South , Central , and East .
Previously from 1992 to 2010 , the Ground Forces were divided into six military districts : Moscow , Leningrad , North Caucausian , Privolzhsk-Ural , Siberian and Far Eastern and Russia 's four fleets and one flotilla were organizations on par with the Ground Forces ' Military Districts .
These six MDs were merged into the four new MDs , which now also incorporate the air forces and naval forces .
There is one remaining Russian military base , the 102nd Military Base , in Armenia left of the former Transcaucasus Group of Forces .
It may report to the Southern Military District .
The Navy consists of four fleets and one flotilla : Northern Fleet ( HQ at Severomorsk ) subordinated to Joint Strategic Command West .
Baltic Fleet ( HQ at Kaliningrad in the exclave of Kaliningrad Oblast ) subordinated to Joint Strategic Command West .
Black Sea Fleet ( HQ at Sevastopol , Ukraine subordinated to Joint Strategic Command South .
( In 1997 , the Ukrainian government agreed that Russia would be allowed to lease several base areas around Sevastopol until 2017 . )
This lease has been extended by 25 years through 2042 with an option for an additional five years through 2047 .
Caspian Flotilla ( HQ at Astrakhan ) subordinated to Joint Strategic Command South .
Pacific Fleet ( HQ at Vladivostok ) subordinated to Joint Strategic Command East .
There is also the Kaliningrad Special Region , under the command of the Commander Baltic Fleet , which has Ground & Coastal Forces , formerly the 11th Guards Army , with a motor rifle division and a motor rifle brigade , and a fighter aviation regiment of Sukhoi Su-27 ` Flanker ' , as well as other forces .
Similarly , there is the Northeast Group of Troops and Forces , headquartered at Petropavlovsk-Kamchatskiy , comprising all Russian Armed Forces components in the Kamchatka Oblast and the Chukotka Autonomous Okrug ( district ) and subordinate to the Commander Pacific Fleet headquartered in Vladivostok .
In mid 2010 a reorganisation was announced which consolidated military districts and the navy 's fleets into four Joint Strategic Commands ( OSC ) .
Geographically divided , the four commands will be : Joint Strategic Command West - Western Military District ( HQ in St. Petersburg ) , includes the Northern and Baltic Fleets ; Joint Strategic Command South - Southern Military District ( HQ in Rostov-on-Don ) includes the Black Sea Fleet and Caspian Flotilla ; Joint Strategic Command Center - Central Military District ( HQ in Yekaterinburg ) ; Joint Strategic Command East - Eastern Military District ( HQ in Khabarovsk ) , includes the Pacific Fleet .
The plan , was put in place on December 1 , 2010 , and mirrors a proposed reorganisation by former Chief of the General Staff Army General Yuri Baluyevsky for a Regional Command East which was not in fact implemented .
The four commands were set up by a decree of President Medvedev on 14 July 2010 .
In July 2011 , an Operational-Strategic Command of Missile-Space Defense has also been established on the basis of the former Special Purpose Command of the Russian Air Force .
It is expected to be operational on December 1 , 2011 .
A decision whether the VKO will be subordinated to the Air Force or the Space Forces has yet to be taken .
Commander of the VKO is General-Lieutenant Valery Ivanov .
A Presidential decree of January 2011 named commanders for several of the new organisational structures .
Russian military command posts , according to Globalsecurity.org , include Chekhov\/Sharapovo about 80 kilometres ( 50 mi ) south of Moscow , for the General Staff and President , Chaadayevka near Penza , Voronovo in Moscow , and a facility at Lipetsk all for the national leadership , Yamantau in the Urals , and command posts for the Strategic Rocket Forces at Kuntsevo in Moscow ( primary ) and Kosvinsky Mountain in the Urals ( alternate ) .
It is speculated that many of the Moscow bunkers are linked by the special underground Moscow Metro 2 line .
Russian security bodies not under the control of the Ministry of Defense include the Internal Troops of the Ministry of Internal Affairs , the Border Guard Service of Russia ( part of the Federal Security Service ) , the Kremlin Regiment and the rest of the Federal Protective Service ( Russia ) , the Federal Communications and Information Agency , and the Ministry of Emergency Situations , the country 's civil defense service since 1995 and successor to earlier civil defense units .
As of 2008 ( update ) , some 480,000 young men are brought into the Army via Conscription in Russia in two call-ups each year .
The term of service is 12 months .
Eligible age is 18 to 27 years old .
Deferments are provided to undergraduate and graduate students , men solely supporting disabled relatives , parents of at least two children and - upon Presidential proclamation - to some employees of military-oriented enterprises .
Men holding Ph.D. as well as sons and brothers of servicemen killed or disabled during their military service are released of conscription .
There are widespread problems with hazing in the Army , known as dedovshchina , where first-year draftees are bullied by second-year draftees , a practice that appeared in its current form after the change to a two-year service term in 1967 .
To combat this problem , a new decree was signed in March 2007 , which cut the conscription service term from 24 to 18 months .
The term was cut further to one year on January 1 , 2008 .
Thirty percent of Russian Armed Forces ' personnel were contract servicemen at the end of 2005 .
For the foreseeable future , the Armed Forces will be a mixed contract\/conscript force .
The Russian Armed Forces need to maintain a mobilization reserve to have manning resources capable of reinforcing the permanent readiness forces if the permanent readiness forces can not deter or suppress an armed conflict on their own .
The ranks of the Russian military are also open to non-Russian citizens of the Commonwealth of Independent States , of which Russia is the largest member .
By December 2003 , the Russian parliament had approved a law in principle to permit the Armed Forces to employ foreign nationals on contract by offering them Russian citizenship after several years service .
Yet up to 2010 , foreigners could only serve in Russia 's armed forces after getting a Russian passport .
Under a 2010 Defense Ministry plan , foreigners without dual citizenship would able to sign up for five-year contracts and will be eligible for Russian citizenship after serving three years .
The change could open the way for CIS citizens to get fast-track Russian citizenship , and counter the effects of Russia 's demographic crisis on its army recruitment .
Awards and decorations of the Armed Forces are covered at Awards and Emblems of the Ministry of Defense of the Russian Federation .
On 17 November 2011 , General Nikolai Makarov said that Russia had reached a crisis in the conscript service where there simply were not sufficient able bodied men to draft and was forced to halve its conscription .
In 1988 military spending was a single line item in the Soviet state budget , totaling 21 billion rubles ( 687.77100 million U.S. dollars ) .
Given the size of the military establishment , however , the actual figure was considered to be far higher .
However , between 1991 and 1997 newly independent Russia 's defense spending fell by a factor of eight in real prices .
Between 1988 and 1993 weapons production in Russia fell by at least 50 % for virtually every major weapons system .
In 1998 , when Russia experienced a severe financial crisis , its military expenditure in real terms reached its lowest point - barely one-quarter of the USSR 's in 1991 , and two-fifths of the level of 1992 , the first year of Russia 's independent existence .
Defense spending is consistently increasing by at least a minimum of one-third year-on-year , leading to overall defense expenditure almost quadrupling over the past six years , and according to Finance Minister Alexei Kudrin , this rate is to be sustained through 2010 .
Official government military spending for 2005 was US $ 32.4 billion , though various sources , have estimated Russia 's military expenditures to be considerably higher than the reported amount .
Estimating Russian military expenditure is beset with difficulty ; the annual IISS Military Balance has underscored the problem numerous times within its section on Russia .
The IISS Military Balance comments - ` By simple observation .
.
( the military budget ) would appear to be lower than is suggested by the size of the armed forces or the structure of the military-industrial complex , and thus neither of the figures is particularly useful for comparative analysis ' .
By some estimates , overall Russian defense expenditure is now at the second highest in the world after the USA .
According to Alexander Kanshin , Chairman of the Public Chamber of Russia on affairs of veterans , military personnel , and their families , the Russian military is losing up to US$ 13 billion to corruption every year .
On 16 September 2008 Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin announced that in 2009 , Russian defense budget will be increased to a record amount of $ 50 billion .
On 16 February 2009 Russia 's deputy defense minister said state defense contracts would not be subject to cuts this year despite the ongoing financial crisis , and that there would be no decrease in 2009 .
The budget would still be 1,376 billion roubles and in the current exchange rates this would amount to $ 41.5 billion .
However , later that month , due to the world financial crisis , the Russian Parliament 's Defense Committee stated that the Russian defense budget would instead be slashed by 15 percent , from $ 40 billion to $ 34 billion , with further cuts to come .
On 5 May 2009 , First Deputy Prime Minister Sergei Ivanov said that the defense budget for 2009 will be 1.3 trillion rubles ( US$ 39.4 billion ) .
322 billion rubles are allocated to purchase weapons , and the rest of the fund will be spent on construction , fuel storage and food supply .
About 70 % of the former Soviet Union 's defense industries are located in the Russian Federation .
Many defense firms have been privatized ; some have developed significant partnerships with firms in other countries .
The structure of the state defense order under President Putin changed .
Priority was given to the acquisition of sophisticated modern weapons , in light of the events in Chechnya .
Previously , financing of strategic nuclear deterrence forces had been a priority , and up to 80 % of assignments for the state defense order were spent on their needs .
It was planned that beginning from 2000 the state defense order would comprise two priority directions : assignments for the nuclear deterrence forces , and assignments for purchase of conventional arms including the precision guided weapons .
The recent steps towards modernisation of the Armed Forces have been made possible by Russia 's economic resurgence based on oil and gas revenues as well a strengthening of its own domestic market .
Mainly as a result of lessons learned during the August War , the State Armament Programme for 2011-2020 was launched in December 2010 .
Prime Minister Putin announced that 20-21 .5 trillion roubles ( over $ 650 billion ) will be allocated to purchase new hardware in the next 10 years .
The aim is to have a growth of 30 % of modern equipment in the army , navy and air force by 2015 , and of 70 % by 2020 .
In some categories , the proportion of new weapon systems will reach 80 % or even 100 % .
At this point , the Russian MOD plans to purchase , among others , up to 150 ICBMs , 600 aircraft , 1,000 helicopters , 18 submarines , 15 frigates , 35 corvettes and 62 air defense battalions .
Several existing types will be upgraded .
As of 2011 , Russia 's chief military prosecutor said that 20 % of the defense budget was being stolen or defrauded yearly .
