The American Federation of Musicians defines arranging as `` the art of preparing and adapting an already written composition for presentation in other than its original form .
An arrangement may include reharmonization , paraphrasing , and\/or development of a composition , so that it fully represents the melodic , harmonic , and rhythmic structure '' ( Corozine 2002 , p. 3 ) .
Orchestration differs in that it is only adapting music for an orchestra or musical ensemble while arranging `` involves adding compositional techniques , such as new thematic material for introductions , transitions , or modulations , and endings ... Arranging is the art of giving an existing melody musical variety '' ( ibid ) .
Arrangements and transcriptions of classical and serious music go back to the early history of this genre .
In particular music written for the piano frequently underwent this treatment .
The suite of ten piano pieces Pictures at an Exhibition by Modest Mussorgsky , has been arranged over twenty times , perhaps the most famous and notable being that of Maurice Ravel .
Due to his lack of expertise in orchestration , the American composer George Gershwin had his Rhapsody in Blue orchestrated and arranged by Ferde Grofé .
Arrangers in pop music recordings often add parts for orchestral or band instruments involving new material such that the arrangers may reasonably be considered co-composers , although for copyright and royalty purposes usually are not .
Rhythm section parts are usually improvised or otherwise invented by the performers themselves using chord symbols or a lead sheet as a guide .
( Rhythm section instruments usually include guitars , bass guitars , string basses , piano and other keyboard instruments , and drums . )
An existing pop song can be re-recorded with a different arrangement to the original .
As well as different instruments , the tempo , time signature and key signature may be altered , sometimes drastically so .
The end result is a song that retains familiar phrases and lyrics , but offers something new .
This practice was particularly popular in the late 1960s .
Well known examples of this include Joe Cocker 's version of The Beatles ' With a Little Help from My Friends , and Ike And Tina Turner 's version of Creedence Clearwater Revival 's Proud Mary .
The American group Vanilla Fudge and British group Yes based their early careers on radical re-arrangements of contemporary hits .
Some remixes , particularly in dance music , can also be considered re-arrangements in this style .
Jonathan Tunick is the most prominent arranger , being one of only twelve people to have won Oscar , Grammy , Emmy , and Tony awards .
In jazz an unscored collaborative arrangement is called a `` head arrangement '' ( Randel 2002 , p. 294 ; it is in the head of the musician ( s ) ) .
Big bands such as those of Duke Ellington ( at the very beginning of his career ) , Bennie Moten , and Count Basie performed head arrangements ( ibid ) .
Arrangements for small jazz combos are usually informal , minimal , and uncredited .
This was particularly so for combos in the bebop era .
In general , the larger the ensemble , the greater the need for a formal arrangement , although the early Count Basie big band was famous for its head arrangements , so called because they were worked out by the players themselves , memorized immediately and never written down .
Most arrangements for large ensembles , big bands , in the swing era , were written down , however , and credited to a specific arranger , as were later arrangements for the Count Basie big band by Sammy Nestico and Neal Hefti .
Don Redman made significant innovations in the pattern of arrangement in Fletcher Henderson 's orchestra in the 1920s .
He introduced the pattern of arranging melodies in the body of arrangements and arranging section performances of the big band .
Benny Carter became Fletcher 's main arranger in the early 30 's , moving on become as famous for his arranging expertise as his musicianship .
Billy Strayhorn was an arranger of great renown in the Duke Ellington orchestra beginning in 1938 .
Jelly Roll Morton is considered the earliest jazz arranger , writing down the parts when he was touring about 1912-1915 so that pick-up bands could play his compositions .
Big band arrangements are informally called charts .
In the swing era they were usually either arrangements of popular songs or they were entirely new compositions .
Duke Ellington 's and Billy Strayhorn 's arrangements for the Duke Ellington big band were usually new compositions , and some of Eddie Sauter 's arrangements for the Benny Goodman band and Artie Shaw 's arrangements for his own band were new compositions as well .
It became more common to arrange sketchy jazz combo compositions for big band after the bop era .
After 1950 , the big band trend declined in number .
However , several bands continued and arrangers provided renowned arrangements .
Gil Evans wrote a number of large-ensemble arrangements in the late fifties and early sixties intended for recording sessions only .
Other arrangers of note include Vic Schoen , Pete Rugolo , Oliver Nelson , Johnny Richards , Billy May , Thad Jones , Maria Schneider , Bob Brookmeyer , Steve Sample , Sr , Lou Marini , Nelson Riddle , Ralph Burns , Billy Byers , Gordon Jenkins , Ray Conniff , Henry Mancini , Gil Evans , Gordon Goodwin , and Ray Reach .
The string section is a body of instruments composed of various stringed instruments .
By the 19th Century orchestral music in Europe had standardized the string section into the following homogeneous instrumental groups : first violins , second violins , violas , cellos , and double basses .
The string section in a multi-sectioned orchestra is referred sometimes to as the `` string choir . ''
The harp is also a stringed instrument , but is not a member of or homogenous with the violin family and is not considered part of the string choir .
Samuel Adler classifies the harp as a plucked string instrument in the same category as the guitar ( acoustic or electric ) , mandolin , banjo , or zither .
Like the harp these instruments do not belong to the violin family and are not homogenous with the string choir .
In modern arranging these instruments are considered part of the rhythm section .
The electric string bass and upright string bass-depending on the circumstance-can be treated by the arranger as either string section or rhythm section instruments .
A group of instruments in which each member plays a unique part-rather than playing in unison with other like instruments-is referred to as a chamber ensemble .
A chamber ensemble made up entirely of strings of the violin family is referred to by its size .
A string trio consists of three players , a string quartet four , a string quintet five , and so on .
In most circumstances the string section is treated by the arranger as one homogenous unit and its members are required to play preconceived material rather than improvise .
A string section can be utilized on its own ( this is referred to as a string orchestra ) or in conjunction with any of the other instrumental sections .
More than one string orchestra can be utilized .
A standard string section ( vln. , vln 2. , vla. , vcl , cb . )
with each section playing unison allows the arranger to create a five-part texture .
Often an arranger will divide each violin section in half or thirds to achieve a denser texture .
It is possible to carry this division to its logical extreme in which each member of the string section plays his or her own unique part .
Artistic , budgetary and logistical concerns will determine the size and instrumentation of a string section .
Due to the large percussion section utilized in the Broadway musical West Side Story , composer Leonard Bernstein chose to utilize a string section without violas .
George Martin , producer and arranger for The Beatles , warns arrangers about the intonation issues when only two like instruments play in unison .
`` After a string quartet , '' Martin explains , `` I do not think there is a satisfactory sound for strings until one has at least three players on each line ... as a rule two stringed instruments together create a slight `` beat '' which does not give a smooth sound . ''
While any combination and number of string instruments is possible in a section , a traditional string section sound is achieved with a violin-heavy balance of instruments .
