Ashley Michelle Tisdale ( born July 2 , 1985 ) is an American actress and singer who rose to prominence portraying the candy-counter girl Maddie Fitzpatrick in Disney Channel 's The Suite Life of Zack & Cody and the female antagonist Sharpay Evans in the High School Musical film series .
The High School Musical series became a successful franchise which included two television films , a feature movie , a spin-off and numerous soundtrack albums .
The popularity earned by Tisdale in High School Musical led her to sign a solo record deal with Warner Bros. .
Records in 2006 that allowed her to release two studio albums , Headstrong ( 2007 ) and Guilty Pleasure ( 2009 ) .
Tisdale has a prominent voice role as Candace Flynn in Disney Channel 's Phineas & Ferb , a cartoon which became television 's most-watched animated series among kids and tweens and had been met with acclaim by critics .
She also owns a production company named Blondie Girl Production and has worked as an executive producer in a number of movies and television shows that includes the ABC Family television film Picture This and the Bravo 's 2012 unscripted series Miss Advised .
During 2009 and 2010 , Tisdale had her first major broadcast role in The CW 's television series Hellcats as Savannah Monroe , an intense and very religious cheerleader .
In 2012 , she was cast in a leading role in Scary Movie 5 , the fourth sequel to the 2000 movie , set to premiere in 2013 .
Tisdale was born in West Deal , New Jersey on July 2 , 1985 , to Lisa ( née Morris ) and Mike Tisdale , the manager of a construction company .
Her elder sister , Jennifer Tisdale , is an actress .
Through her grandfather , Tisdale is related to businessman Ron Popeil .
She grew up in Ocean Township .
She is Jewish on her mother 's side and was raised with `` a little bit of both '' of her parents ' religions .
At the age of three , Tisdale met her current manager , Bill Perlman , at a New Jersey mall .
He sent her to numerous auditions for commercials , resulting in her placement in more than 100 national network TV ads as a kid .
She began her theatrical career by appearing in Gypsy : A Musical Fable and The Sound of Music at Monmouth County 's Jewish Community Center .
At the age of eight , she was cast to play the part of Cosette in a national touring production of the musical Les Misérables .
`` When I was little , I saw the play Les Misérables on Broadway , I thought it was the most amazing thing I have ever seen so I went to my manager and told him I wanted to be in it '' , said Tisdale in an interview to Newsday in 2007 .
She also claims to have had only a single singing lesson before landing the role .
Tisdale toured for two years on Les Misérables before landing a role in an international touring production of Annie in Korea .
At the age of twelve , Tisdale sang at the White House for President Bill Clinton .
In the late 1990s and early 2000s , Tisdale had minor roles in several television shows such as The Hughleys , Smart Guy , 7th Heaven , Boston Public and Bette and in the feature films A Bug 's Life and Donnie Darko .
During this time , she simultaneously worked as a Ford Model .
For her role in Boston Public , she received a 2000 Young Artist Award nomination for `` Best Guest Performance In a TV drama '' .
In 2004 , she was cast as the teenage candy-counter girl Maddie Fitzpatrick in the Disney Channel series The Suite Life of Zack & Cody , which premiered in March 2005 and ended in 2008 .
She later won her first award at the UK Nickelodeon Kids ' Choice Awards for `` Best TV Actress '' , due to her performance as Fitzpatrick .
Although the producers of the Disney Channel Original Movie High School Musical did not initially consider her because of her `` good-girl image '' on The Suite Life , Tisdale was eventually cast as the popular , narcissistic high school student Sharpay Evans in the 2006 film .
High School Musical became Disney Channel 's most watched movie that year , with 7.7 million viewers in its US premiere broadcast .
The soundtrack , in which Tisdale lent her vocals for several songs , became the top-selling album in the United States that year .
Tisdale became the first female artist to debut with two songs simultaneously on the Billboard Hot 100 chart with `` What I 've Been Looking For '' and `` Bop to the Top '' , both tracks from the film 's soundtrack .
Due to the popularity earned by Tisdale through her performance in High School Musical , Warner Bros. .
Records signed her for a recording contract in July 2006 and she started working on her debut album .
Headstrong is Tisdale 's US Gold-certified debut album , released in February 2007 via Warner Bros , which debuted at number five on the Billboard 200 , with 64,000 copies sold in that week .
`` Be Good to Me '' was released as the album 's first single in the December 2006 and `` He Said She Said '' was released as the second , in September 2007 .
In 2008 , `` Not Like That '' and `` Suddenly '' were released as singles in a selective number of countries that did not include North America .
A music DVD entitled There 's Something About Ashley followed the release of her debut album , with a three-song trilogy comprising music videos and a documentary about the creation of Headstrong .
The success of the first High School Musical film led Tisdale to reprise the role in the 2007 sequel High School Musical 2 .
She lent vocals for several tracks in the film 's soundtrack and her performance in High School Musical 2 was critically acclaimed by many media outlets such as The Hollywood Reporter .
Even more successful than the first film , High School Musical 2 became the most-watched cable-television movie , receiving 17 million viewers on its premiere night .
Also in 2007 , Tisdale was given the voice role of Candace Flynn , the series ' secondary antagonist , in Phineas and Ferb , which became television 's most-watched animated series among kids and tweens and had very positive reviews .
As a producer , Tisdale formed her own production company in 2008 and named it Blondie Girl Productions .
The 2008 ABC Family Original Movie Picture This marked Tisdale 's debut as an executive producer and also in a leading role , in which she played Mandy Gilbert , an unpopular and bullied teenager .
The film captured 4.3 million total viewers in its debut night .
Tisdale reprised her role as Sharpay Evans in the 2008 Walt Disney Pictures feature film High School Musical 3 : Senior Year .
Her performance in the film earned her an MTV Movie Award for `` Breakthrough Performance Female '' in 2009 .
and acclaim by critics including Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly , who labeled her one of film 's breakout stars and said her portrayal of Evans makes `` narcissism a goofy , bedazzled pleasure '' , and Mark Kermode , who said Tisdale is 2008 's `` best supporting actress '' .
High School Musical 3 earned $ 42 million in its domestic opening weekend , which became the biggest opening for a musical film .
Her second studio album , Guilty Pleasure , was released in 2009 .
Described by Tisdale as a `` rocker and edgier '' album , it generated mixed reviews , with a 54 % rating on Metacritic , and Billboard claimed the album `` does n't give the singer room to comfortably let loose '' .
Guilty Pleasure debuted at number twelve on the Billboard 200 , selling 25,000 copies in its first week , archiving a low commercial performance in comparison with her debut album .
The song `` It 's Alright , It 's OK '' was released as the album 's lead single in April in airplay and digital formats and a second single , `` Crank It Up '' , was later released in October .
Tisdale starred in the 2009 20th Century Fox family feature film Aliens in the Attic as Bethany Pearson , the elder sister of the family and although she is credited as one of the main characters , The New York Times said Tisdale `` spends much of the film off screen '' .
The film was a minor success in box office , grossing $ 60 million worldwide .
Tisdale 's return into broadcast television occurred in 2010 when her involvement in The CW Television Network drama series Hellcats was announced in March by The Hollywood Reporter , that reported Tisdale had signed on to co-star on her first major broadcast series role as Savannah Monroe , the peppy and fiercely intense captain of the Hellcats .
The series had its script based on the book Cheer : Inside the Secret World of College Cheerleaders by journalist Kate Torgovnick and was described as `` Election meets Bring It On '' by critics .
Hellcats , however , had only one full season as it was canceled by The CW in 2011 .
She had vocal roles in several TV cartoons , during 2010 , including The Cleveland Show , Family Guy and Glenn Martin , DDS .
A guest appearance in an episode of Raising Hope and a starring role in a CBS pilot produced by Louis C.K. , which has not been picked up by the channel , followed in 2012 .
A High School Musical spin-off entitled Sharpay 's Fabulous Adventure , released directly in DVD , featured Tisdale reprising her role as Sharpay Evans and also serving as the executive producer .
The Disney Channel Original Movie captured 5 million viewers on its premiere night on Disney Channel .
Tisdale voiced Candance Flynn in the 2011 's Phineas and Ferb movie that premiered on Disney Channel with 7.6 million viewers on its debut night .
During 2011 , Tisdale started focusing on her career as a television and film producer .
Her production company Blondie Girl Productions signed a multiyear production deal with Relativity Media in 2010 , to create , develop and executive produce a series .
Tisdale has been working in a film for Disney Channel titled Adventure Quest , a project for Nickelodeon , a Bravo TV reality show titled Miss Advised , an upcoming television series based on Laurie Faria Stolarz 's book Blue Is for Nightmares , three digital series , and a drama project for ABC Family .
Tisdale 's involvement in Dimension Films ' Scary Movie 5 , the fourth sequel to the 2000 movie was announced in June , 2012 , by The Weinstein Company .
She is reported to play one of the leading roles in the film , which is set to an early 2013 release .
She has also booked a two-episode arc in the fifth season of FX 's Sons of Anarchy in which she will portray Emma Jean , a desireble and high-priced escort .
