Aspen is a common name for certain tree species ; some , but not all , are classified by botanists in the section Populus , of the poplar genus .
These species are called aspens : Populus adenopoda : Chinese aspen ( China , south of P. tremula ) Populus grandidentata : Bigtooth aspen ( eastern North America , south of P. tremuloides ) Populus sieboldii : Japanese aspen ( Japan ) Populus tremula : Eurasian aspen ( northern Europe and Asia ) Populus tremuloides : American aspen ( northern and western North America ) The aspens are all native to cold regions with cool summers , in the north of the Northern Hemisphere , extending south at high altitudes in the mountains .
They are all medium-sized deciduous trees reaching 15-30 m ( 49-98 ft ) tall .
All of the aspens typically grow in large clonal colonies derived from a single seedling , and spread by means of root suckers ; new stems in the colony may appear at up to 30-40 m ( 98-130 ft ) from the parent tree .
Each individual tree can live for 40-150 years above ground , but the root system of the colony is long-lived .
In some cases , this is for thousands of years , sending up new trunks as the older trunks die off above ground .
For this reason , it is considered to be an indicator of ancient woodlands .
One such colony in Utah , given the nickname of `` Pando '' , is estimated to be 80,000 years old , making it possibly the oldest living colony of aspens .
Some aspen colonies become very large with time , spreading about 1 m ( 3.3 ft ) per year , eventually covering many hectares .
They are able to survive forest fires , because the roots are below the heat of the fire , with new sprouts growing after the fire burns out .
Aspens do not thrive in the shade , and it is difficult for seedlings to grow in an already mature aspen stand .
Fire indirectly benefits aspen trees , since it allows the saplings to flourish in open sunlight in the burned landscape .
Lately , aspens have an increased popularity in forestry , mostly because of their fast growth rate and ability to regenerate from sprouts , making the reforestation after harvesting much cheaper , since no planting or sowing is required .
In contrast with many trees , aspen bark is base-rich , ( clarification needed ) meaning aspens are important hosts for bryophytes and act as food plants for the larvae of butterfly ( Lepidoptera ) species-see List of Lepidoptera that feed on poplars .
Young aspen bark is an important seasonal forage for the European hare and other animals in early spring .
Aspen is also a tree of choice of the European beaver .
Aspen wood is white and soft , but fairly strong , and has low flammability .
It has a number of uses , notably for making matches and paper where its low flammability makes it safer to use than most other woods .
Shredded aspen wood is used for packing and stuffing , sometimes called excelsior ( wood wool ) .
It is also a popular animal bedding , since it lacks the phenols associated with pine and juniper , which are thought to cause respiratory system ailments in some animals .
Heat-treated aspen is a popular material for the interiors of a sauna .
While standing trees sometimes tend to rot from the heart outward , the dry timber weathers very well , becoming silvery-grey and resistant to rotting and warping , and has traditionally been used for rural construction in the northwestern regions of Russia ( especially for roofing , in the form of thin slats ) .
Aspens and other members of the Populus genus contain salicylates , compounds related to aspirin .
Leaves and leaf buds of aspens have been used to treat burns , irritations , aches , and swollen joints .
Bitter herbal tea from bark and leaves has been used to treat mild urinary tract inflammations .
The Ojibwe used the inner bark of the trunk as a poultice , and the Cree ate the inner bark in the spring as a mild purgative .
Aspen has been traditionally reputed in many countries to drive off evil spirits , hence it was often planted near the dwellings .
According to an Eastern Slavic apocryphal legend , Judas Iscariot hanged himself on an aspen tree , hence its leaves have been trembling with horror ever since .
The species does not grow in the Middle East , so this legend obviously has local syncretic origins .
An aspen stake was believed to be one of the few weapons suitable to kill a vampire .
By the same token , a bigger stake could be driven into the grave of people condemned to damnation , so as to prevent them from rising from the dead .
