`` Atrax '' redirects here .
For the mythological figure , see Atrax ( mythology ) .
Atracinae , commonly known as Australian funnel-web spiders , is a subfamily of spiders in the funnel-web spider family Hexathelidae .
Atracinae consists of three genera : Atrax , Hadronyche , and Illawarra .
The subfamily includes species with medically significant venom , the most well-known of which is the Sydney funnel-web spider ( Atrax robustus ) .
There have been no fatalities since the introduction of modern first aid techniques and antivenin .
These spiders are medium-to-large in size , with body lengths ranging from 1 cm to 5 cm ( 0.4 '' to 2 '' ) .
They are darkly colored , ranging from black to blue-black to plum to brown , with a glossy , hairless carapace covering the front part of the body .
Like the related diplurid spiders , some hexathelids have relatively long spinnerets ; this is especially true of A. robustus .
Like other Mygalomorphae ( also incorrectly called `` Orthognatha '' ) - an infraorder of spiders that includes the tropical tarantulas - these spiders have fangs which point straight down the body and do not point towards each other ( cf Araneomorphae ) .
They have ample venom glands that lie entirely within their chelicerae .
Their fangs are large and powerful , capable of penetrating fingernails and soft shoes .
Funnel-webs make their burrows in moist , cool , sheltered habitats-under rocks , in and under rotting logs , some in rough-barked trees ( occasionally metres above ground ) .
They are commonly found in suburban rockeries and shrubberies , rarely in lawns or other open terrain .
A funnel-web 's burrow characteristically has irregular silk trip-lines radiating from the entrance .
Unlike some related trapdoor spiders , funnel-webs do not build lids to their burrows .
The primary range of the Australian funnel-web spiders is the eastern coast of Australia , with specimens found in New South Wales , South Australia , Victoria , and Queensland .
The only Australian states without funnel-webs are Western Australia and the Northern Territory .
Australian funnel-webs are one of the three most dangerous spiders in the world and are regarded by some to be the most dangerous .
Examination of bite records has implicated wandering males in most if not all fatal funnel-web bites to humans .
Adult males , recognized by the modified terminal segment of the palp , will defend themselves vigorously if they feel threatened and tend to wander during the warmer months of the year looking for receptive females for mating .
They are attracted to water and hence are often found in swimming pools , into which they often fall while wandering .
The spiders can survive such immersion for several hours and can deliver a bite when removed from the water .
They also show up in garages and yards in suburban Sydney .
Contrary to a commonly held belief , no funnel-web spider is able to jump , although they can run quickly .
While some very venomous spiders may give dry bites , these spiders do so much less frequently .
An inefficient mode of delivery ( to large animals ) and interrupted contact are also possible causes of low volume delivery .
It has been claimed that approximately 10 % to 25 % of bites will produce significant toxicity but the likelihood can not be predicted and all should be treated as potentially life-threatening .
Funnel-webs are not normally aggressive but will defend themselves vigorously if frightened or threatened .
During an attack the funnel-web spider generally maintains a tight grip on its victim and bites repeatedly , making it an especially traumatic experience for humans who are bitten and increasing the risk of severe envenomation .
There have been 27 recorded deaths in Australia in the last 100 years from spider bites .
Bites from Sydney funnel-web spiders have caused thirteen deaths ( seven in children ) .
In all cases where the sex of the biting spider could be determined , it was found to be the male of the species .
Most victims were young , ill or infirm .
One member of the genus Hadronyche , the northern tree funnel-web has also been claimed to cause fatal envenomation but , to date , this lacks the support of a specific medical report .
Assays of venom from several Hadronyche species have shown it to be similar to Atrax venom .
There are many different toxins in the venom of Atrax and Hadronyche spiders .
Collectively , these spider toxins are given the name atracotoxins ( ACTX ) , as all these spiders belong to the subfamily Atracinae .
The first toxins isolated were the δ-ACTX toxins present in the venom of both A. robustus ( δ-ACTX-Ar1 , formerly known as robustoxin or atracotoxin ) and H. versuta ( δ-ACTX-Hv1a , formerly known as versutotoxin ) .
Both these toxins produce the same funnel-web envenoming syndrome in monkeys as that seen in humans , suggesting that they are responsible for the physiological effects seen with crude venom .
These toxins are thought to operate by opening sodium channels .
They are presynaptic neurotoxins that ( via sodium channels ) induce spontaneous , repetitive firing of action potentials in autonomic and motor neurons and inhibit neurally mediated transmitted release resulting in a surge of endogenous acetylcholine , noradrenaline and adrenaline .
Although extremely toxic to primates , the venom appears to be fairly harmless to many other animals .
It has been suggested that these animals may be resistant to the venom 's effects due to the presence of IgG , and possibly cross-linked IgG and IgM inactivating factors in their blood plasma that bind to the toxins responsible and neutralise them .
The female venom was thought to be only about a sixth as potent to humans as that of the male The bite of a female or juvenile may still be serious ; however , considerable variability occurs in venom toxicity between species , together with assumable degrees of inefficiency in the method of venom delivery .
Envenomation symptoms observed following bites by these spiders are very similar .
The bite is initially very painful , due to the biochemical action of the venom and the size of the fangs penetrating the skin .
Puncture marks and local bleeding are also usually visible .
If substantial envenomation occurs , symptoms will generally occur within minutes and progress rapidly .
Early symptoms of systemic envenomation include goose bumps , sweating , tingling around the mouth and tongue , twitching ( initially facial and intercostal ) , salivation , watery eyes , elevated heart rate and elevated blood pressure .
As systemic envenomation progresses symptoms include nausea , vomiting , shortness of breath ( caused by airway obstruction ) , agitation , confusion , writhing , grimacing , muscle spasms , pulmonary oedema ( of neurogenic or hypertensive origin ) , metabolic acidosis and extreme hypertension .
The final stages of severe envenomation include dilation of the pupils ( often fixed ) , uncontrolled generalised muscle twitching , unconsciousness , elevated intracranial pressure and death .
When death occurs it is generally as a result of progressive hypotension or possibly elevated intracranial pressure consequent on cerebral oedema .
The onset of severe envenomation can be rapid .
In one prospective study , the median time to onset of envenomation was 28 minutes , with only two cases having onset after 2 hours ( both had pressure immobilisation bandages applied ) .
Death may occur within a period ranging from 15 minutes ( this occurred when a small child was bitten ) to three days .
Due to the severity of symptoms , and the speed with which they progress , in areas where these spiders are known to live all bites from large black spiders should be treated as though they were caused by a funnel-web spider .
First aid treatment for a suspected funnel-web spider bite consists of immediately applying a pressure immobilisation bandage ; a technique which consists of wrapping the bitten limb with a crepe bandage , as well as applying a splint to limit movement of the limb .
This technique was originally developed for snakebites but has also been shown to be effective at slowing venom movement and preventing systemic envenomation in case of funnel-web spider bite ; there is evidence to suggest that periods of prolonged localisation may slowly inactivate the venom .
Emergency medical treatment should be sought as soon as possible .
It is important that the pressure immobilisation bandage is not removed prematurely ; it should remain in place until intravenous access has been established , adequate medical monitoring is in place and a supply of antivenom is available .
A patient who is not displaying any symptoms of systemic envenomation may deteriorate rapidly when the bandage is removed .
Further supportive care may be necessary , but the mainstay of treatment is antivenom .
Antivenom is raised against male Atrax robustus venom but appears to be effective for all species of funnel web spiders .
Funnel-web antivenom has also been shown to reverse the in vitro effects of Eastern Mouse spider ( Missulena bradleyi ) venom .
Prior to the introduction of antivenom , envenomation resulted in significant morbidity and mortality .
The purified rabbit IgG antivenom was developed in 1981 through a team effort led by Dr Struan Sutherland , head of immunology at the Australian Commonwealth Serum Laboratories in Melbourne .
Fortunately , the antivenom is fast-acting and highly and globally effective .
Antivenom therapy has shortened the course of envenomation : prior to antivenom availability , the average length of hospital treatment for severe bites was about 14 days .
Today , antivenom-treated patients are commonly discharged from hospital within 1 to 3 days .
There have been no known deaths since it became available .
