The azuki bean ( アズキ （ 小豆 ） , azuki ?
, also spelled adzuki or aduki ) is an annual vine , Vigna angularis , widely grown throughout East Asia and the Himalayas for its small ( approximately 5 mm ) bean .
The cultivars most familiar in Northeast Asia have a uniform red color .
However , white , black , gray and variously mottled varieties are also known .
Scientists presume Vigna angularis var .
nipponensis is the progenitor .
Genetic evidence indicates that the azuki bean was first domesticated in East Asia and later crossbred with native species in Himalayas .
The bean was first unearthed at Awazu-kotei Ruin of Japanese mid Jōmon period in 4000BC , and later it was commonly found on many Jomon ruins in 4000BC to 2000BC in Japan .
The analysis of the unearthed beans indicates that it was first cultivated in Japan during 4000BC to 2000BC .
In China and Korea it was first found on the ruins in 3000BC to 1000BC , and these are thought to be cultivated ones .
Some Koreans insist that it was first cultivated on the Korean peninsula before 1000 BC and later taken to Japan , where it is now the second most popular legume after the soybean .
The name azuki is a transliteration of the native Japanese name .
Japanese also has a Chinese loanword , shōzu ( 小豆 ? )
, which means `` small bean '' , its counterpart `` large bean '' ( 大豆 , daizu ? )
being the soybean .
In China , the corresponding name ( Chinese : 小豆 ; pinyin : xiǎodòu ) is still used in botanical or agricultural parlance .
However in everyday Chinese , the more common terms are hongdou ( 紅豆 ; hóngdòu ) and chidou ( 赤豆 ; chìdòu ) , both meaning `` red bean '' , because almost all Chinese cultivars are uniformly red .
In English-language discussions of Chinese topics , the term `` red bean '' is often used ( especially in reference to red bean paste ) , but in other contexts this usage can cause confusion with other beans that are also red .
In normal contexts , `` red cowpeas '' have been used to refer to this bean .
In some parts of India , they are referred to as `` Red Chori '' .
In Indian Punjab it is called `` ravaa ` n '' and is a common ingredient of chaat .
In Marathi , it is known as Lal Chavali ( लाल चवळी ) - literally means ` red cowpea ' .
In East Asian cuisine , the azuki bean is commonly eaten sweetened .
In particular , it is often boiled with sugar , resulting in red bean paste ( an ) , a very common ingredient in all of these cuisines .
It is also common to add flavoring to the bean paste , such as chestnut .
Red bean paste is used in many Chinese foods , such as tangyuan , zongzi , mooncakes , baozi and red bean ice .
It is also serves as a filling for Japanese sweets like anpan , dorayaki , imagawayaki , manjū , monaka , anmitsu , taiyaki and daifuku .
A more liquid version , using azuki beans boiled with sugar and a pinch of salt , produces a sweet dish called red bean soup .
Azuki beans are also commonly eaten sprouted , or boiled in a hot , tea-like drink .
Some Asian cultures enjoy red bean paste as a filling or topping for various kinds of waffles , pastries , baked buns or biscuits .
In Japan , rice with azuki beans ( 赤飯 ; sekihan ) is traditionally cooked for auspicious occasions .
Azuki beans are also used to produce amanattō , and as a popular flavor of ice cream .
On October 20 , 2009 , Pepsi Japan released an azuki-flavored Pepsi product .
Azuki beans , along with butter and sugar , form the basis of the popular Somali supper dish cambuulo .
In Gujarat , India , they are known as chori .
Azuki beans are a good source for a variety of minerals , with 1 cup of cooked beans providing 4.6 mg of Iron ( ~ 25 % RDI ) , 119.6 mg of magnesium ( ~ 30 % RDI ) , 1.223 g of potassium ( ~ 25 % AI ) , 4.0 mg of zinc ( ~ 25 % RDI ) and 278 µg of folic acid ( ~ 70 % RDI ) .
