A1 Grand Prix ( A1GP ) was a ` single make ' open-wheel auto racing series .
It was unique in its field in that competitors solely represented their nation as opposed to themselves or a team , the usual format in most formula racing series .
As such , it was often promoted as the `` World Cup of Motorsport '' .
The series was ratified by the Fédération Internationale de l'Automobile ( FIA ) and races were held in the traditional Formula One off-season , the northern hemisphere winter .
The nation-based A1GP concept was founded by Sheikh Maktoum Hasher Maktoum Al Maktoum of Dubai , initially in 2003 .
After a successful first season of A1GP , it was announced on 29 September 2006 that Maktoum was to sell his position as Chairman & Director of A1GP .
The transfer of his share in the organization of A1 Grand Prix to RAB Capital was finalized in December 2006 .
Tony Teixeira took control of the series in 2006 , leading it to liquidation by 2009 .
There are currently plans to revive the series .
Once the series had received the backing of the FIA , a management structure including new executive directors Brian Menell and Tony Teixeira were appointed to oversee the sale of franchises for the operation of international teams .
Thirty franchises were made available ; twenty-three of them were restricted to specified nations , while the other seven were opened to tender for nations that had not been initially targeted .
Twenty-five of the franchises were purchased in time for the 2005-06 A1 Grand Prix season , which began on 25 September 2005 with the A1 Grand Prix of Nations Great Britain at the Brands Hatch circuit in Kent , United Kingdom .
The first season was planned for 12 rounds ( 24 races , with two each weekend ) ; however the cancellation of a race scheduled for Curitiba , Brazil in January 2006 reduced this number to 11 .
Nelson Piquet , Jr. won the inaugural race of the series for A1 Team Brazil .
Their winning form was not to continue .
Wins at Estoril and Malaysia saw A1 Team France build up a sizeable gap .
By the start of the winter break , France had run away with the lead with A1 Team Switzerland 28 points behind .
At the final race of the season in Shanghai , A1 Team France were crowned the first-ever A1 Grand Prix world champions with 172 points .
Switzerland were second with 121 points and A1 Team Great Britain third with 97 points .
Katherine Legge was the first woman to drive A1 Grand Prix cars during test session in December 2005 on Dubai Autodrome .
Changes were made for the 2006-07 season to race durations and distances to improve the spectacle for attendees and TV viewers .
The 2006-07 schedule was released on 7 July 2006 , with the first race at Circuit Park Zandvoort on 1 October 2006 , and the last race at Brands Hatch on 29 April 2007 .
New teams Team Singapore and Team Greece joined the competition but Team Turkey failed to secure funding for the season .
Team Austria , Team Japan , Team Portugal and Team Russia did not return for the second season .
However after securing funding Team Portugal competed in the final four rounds of the second season in South Africa , Mexico , China and Britain .
Team Germany won it with 128 points , 35 points lead ahead of Team New Zealand .
On 29 September , Sheikh Maktoum announced he was resigning his position as chairman and chief executive of the series , seeking to have his place taken by increased shareholder interests .
Maktoum announced his intended resignation in September and his exit from the organization was confirmed in December .
The 2008-09 season was the first season in which the new `` Powered by Ferrari '' A1GP car was used .
According to 2007-08 champion Neel Jani , 90 % of teams in the paddock warned Teixeira ahead of time that this car change was untimely and an inefficient use of funds .
Rule changes included shorter qualifying sessions , a pit-stop during the now longer Sprint Race , removal of limits on Friday test drivers , and reduced Sprint Race points scoring .
The opening round of the season , scheduled as part of the already well established Nikon SuperGP race meeting , was canceled five days before practice was due to begin .
With cars and series infrastructure still tied up in London and no comment forthcoming from A1GP , organisers in Australia were forced to announce the series would not appear at what had been a high profile addition to the A1 Grand Prix calendar .
The event was underwritten by the Queensland state government , who have mentioned the possibility of taking legal recourse against A1 Grand Prix .
The series was thrown into further doubt as more races were canceled , with an announcement made on 5 November 2009 stating that the races in China and Malaysia would not be taking place .
The last race that was to be held in the season , the Dutch round , was switched for Superleague Formula .
This put an end to the hopes the season would start and also put the future of the series in doubt .
A1 Grand Prix used a unique qualifying format , which began at 14:00 local time on the Saturday of the race weekend , to determine the grid lineup for Sunday 's races , the Sprint Race and the Main Race .
The qualifying period was split into four , ten-minute sessions .
Each car was permitted three laps per session , including the laps required for leaving the pits , and for re-entering it .
This allowed one lap to set a competitive time .
There was a five minute break between sessions , which added up to a total of 55 minutes for qualifying .
The grid for the Sprint Race was set based on the cars ' fastest time from either the first or the second session .
The grid for the Feature Race was determined the same way , but using sessions three and four .
However , if there was a red flag due to an accident on the circuit , the timing to the end of qualifying continued to run .
The Sprint Race used the grid determined in sessions one and two of the previous day 's qualifying session , and was held in the early afternoon .
The race began from a rolling start , and its duration was a maximum of 24 minutes plus one additional lap .
Additionally , each team had to make one mandatory pit stop between laps four and eight .
Drivers were permitted four uses of PowerBoost during the Sprint Race .
The Feature Race used the grid determined in sessions three and four of the previous day 's qualifying session , and was held mid-afternoon .
The race began from a standing start , and was a race of approximately 180 kilometres , with a maximum time limit of 69 minutes plus one lap .
Teams had to make two mandatory pit stops during the Feature Race , one between laps eight and sixteen , and another during a pit window , which was not announced until the first window has closed .
Drivers were permitted eight uses of PowerBoost during the Feature Race .
Each team had to complete three compulsory pit stops over the course of the race weekend - one during the Sprint Race , and two during the Feature Race .
During the pit stop , all four tires on the car had to be changed .
A total of 8 mechanics could be used during the stop , however , only 4 were allowed to ` touch the car ' , none of which ( save the so-called `` lollipop man '' that directed the car into its pit ) could be present in the pit lane before the car came to a complete halt .
Refuelling was also not permitted ; infringements of these rules or of the pit-lane speed limit resulted in the imposition of a drive-through penalty .
At the end of Season 3 , A1GP released the results of the season 's pit stop times .
Although having never won a race , A1 Team Australia had the fastest pit crew of all teams .
