Aboriginal land rights in Australia are grants of land to Indigenous Australians by the Commonwealth , state or territory governments of Australia .
Different types of land rights laws exist in Australia , allowing for the grant of land to Indigenous Australians under various conditions .
Land rights schemes are in place in the Northern Territory , Queensland , New South Wales , South Australia and Victoria .
The land titles may recognize traditional interest in the land and protect those interests by giving Indigenous people legal ownership of that land .
According to the National Native Title Tribunal : A successful land rights claim usually results in a special grant of freehold title or perpetual lease .
A title document for the land is issued .
The title is normally held by a community or an organization , not by individuals .
There are usually some restrictions on selling , and dealing with , land that has been granted in a land rights claim .
Normally , the land will be passed down to future generations in a way that recognizes the community 's traditional connection to that country .
The passing of Aboriginal land rights legislaton in Australia was preceded by a number of important Aboriginal protests , including the 1946 Aboriginal Stockmen 's Strike , the 1963 Yolngu Bark Petition , and the 1966 Wave Hill Walk-Off , as well as the Aboriginal Lands Trust Act 1966 ( SA ) , which established the South Australian Aboriginal Lands Trust .
However , it was not until the 1970s , when indigenous Australians ( both Australian Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders ) became more politically active , that there emerged powerful movement for the recognition of Aboriginal land rights .
In 1971 , Justice Richard Blackburn of the Supreme Court of the Northern Territory ruled against the Yolngu in Milirrpum v Nabalco Pty Ltd ( the `` Gove land rights case '' ) under the priniple of terra nullius .
However , Justice Blackburn did acknowledge the claimants ' ritual and economic use of the land and that they had an established system of law ( Madayin ) .
In this way , this was the first significant legal case for Aboriginal Land Rights in Australia .
In the wake of Milirrpum , the Aboriginal Land Rights Commission ( also known as the `` Woodward Royal Commission '' ) was established in the Northern Territory in 1973 .
This Royal Commission , chaired by Justice Woodward , made a number of recommendations in favor of recognizing Aboringal Land Rights .
Taking up many of these recommendations , the Whitlam Labor Government introduced an Aboriginal Land Rights Bill to Parliament ; however , this lapsed upon the dismissal of the government in 1975 .
The succeeding conservative government , led by Malcolm Fraser , reintroduced a Bill , though not of the same content , and it was signed by the Governor-General of Australia on 16 December 1976 .
The Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976 established the basis upon which Aboriginal people in the Northern Territory could claim rights to land based on traditional occupation .
The statute , the first of the Aboriginal land rights acts , was significant in that it allowed a claim of title if claimants could provide evidence of their traditional association with land .
Four Land Councils were established in the Northern Territory under this law .
The Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976 established a procedure that transferred almost 50 per cent of land in the Northern Territory ( around 600 000 km2 ) to collective Indigenous ownership .
The subsequent Anangu Pitjantjatjara Yankunytjatjara Land Rights Act 1981 had a similar effect in South Australia .
Paul Coe , in Coe v Commonwealth ( 1979 ) , attempted ( unsuccessfully ) to bring a class action on behalf of all Aborigines claiming all of Australia .
In 1995 the Indigenous Land Corporation was established by the Federal Government to assist Indigenous Australians to acquire land and manage Indigenous held land sustainably and in a manner that provides cultural , social , economic and environmental benefits for themselves and future generations .
The corporation is funded by an annual payment from the investment returns of the Australian Government 's Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Land Account .
