An actor ( sometimes actress for female ; see terminology ) is a person who acts in a dramatic or comic production and who works in film , television , theater , or radio in that capacity .
After 1660 , when women first appeared on stage , actor and actress were initially used interchangeably for female performers , but later , influenced by the French actrice , actress became the usual term .
The etymology is a simple derivation from actor with ess added .
The word actor refers to a person who acts regardless of gender , and this term `` is increasingly preferred '' , while actress refers specifically to a female person who acts .
Actress `` remains in general use '' , although in a survey of a `` wide cross-section of current British English '' , compiled in 2010 , actor was almost twice as commonly found as actress .
Within the profession , however , the re-adoption of the neutral term dates to the 1950s-60s , the post-war period when women 's contribution to cultural life in general was being re-evaluated .
Actress remains the common term used in major acting awards given to female recipients .
The gender-neutral term `` player '' was common in film in the early days of the Motion Picture Production Code with regards to the cinema of the United States , but is now generally deemed archaic .
However , it remains in use in the theater , often incorporated into the name of a theater group or company ( such as the East West Players ) .
The first recorded case of an actor performing took place in 534 BC ( though the changes in calendar over the years make it hard to determine exactly ) when the Greek performer Thespis stepped on to the stage at the Theatre Dionysus and became the first known person to speak words as a character in a play or story .
Prior to Thespis ' act , stories were only known to be told in song and dance and in third person narrative .
In honor of Thespis , actors are commonly called Thespians .
Theatrical legend to this day maintains that Thespis exists as a mischievous spirit , and disasters in the theater are sometimes blamed on his ghostly intervention .
Actors were traditionally not people of high status , and in the Early Middle Ages traveling acting troupes were often viewed with distrust .
In many parts of Europe , actors could not even receive a Christian burial , and traditional beliefs of the region and time period held that this left any actor forever condemned .
However , this negative perception was largely reversed in the 19th and 20th centuries as acting has become an honored and popular profession and art .
Method acting is a technique developed from the acting ` system ' created in the early 20th century by Konstantin Stanislavski in his work at the Moscow Art Theatre and its studios .
The Group Theatre first popularized the Method in the 1930s ; it was subsequently advanced and developed in new directions by Stella Adler , Sanford Meisner , Uta Hagen , Lee Strasberg ( at the Actors Studio in the 1940s and 50s ) , and others .
In Stanislavski 's system ' , the actor analyzes the character in order to play him or her with psychological realism and emotional authenticity .
Using the Method , an actor may recall emotions or reactions from his or her own life and use them to identify with the character being portrayed .
Method actors are often characterized as immersing themselves so totally in their characters that they continue to portray them even off-stage or off-camera for the duration of the project .
However , this is a popular misconception .
While some actors do employ this approach , it is generally not taught as part of the Method .
Stella Adler , who was a member of the Group Theatre , along with Strasberg , emphasised a different approach of using creative imagination .
Method acting offers a systematic form of actor training in which the actor 's sensory , psychological , and emotional abilities are developed ; it revolutionized theater in the United States .
Presentational acting refers to a relationship between actor and audience , whether by direct address or indirectly by specific use of language , looks , gestures or other signs indicating that the character or actor is aware of the audience 's presence .
( Shakespeare 's use of punning and wordplay , for example , often has this function of indirect contact . )
In representational acting , `` actors want to make us ` believe ' they are the character ; they pretend . ''
The illusion of the fourth wall with the audience as voyeurs is striven for .
In the past , only men could become actors in some societies .
In the ancient Greece and Rome and the medieval world , it was considered disgraceful for a woman to go on the stage , and this belief persisted until the 17th century , when in Venice it was broken .
In the time of William Shakespeare , women 's roles were generally played by men or boys .
When an eighteen-year Puritan prohibition of drama was lifted after the English Restoration of 1660 , women began to appear on stage in England .
Margaret Hughes is credited by some as the first professional actress on the English stage .
This prohibition ended during the reign of Charles II in part due to the fact that he enjoyed watching actresses on stage .
The first occurrence of the term actress was in 1700 according to the OED and is ascribed to Dryden .
In Japan , men ( onnagata ) took over the female roles in kabuki theater when women were banned from performing on stage during the Edo period .
This convention has continued to the present .
However , some forms of Chinese drama have women playing all the roles .
In modern times , women sometimes play the roles of prepubescent boys .
The stage role of Peter Pan , for example , is traditionally played by a woman , as are most principal boys in British pantomime .
Opera has several `` breeches roles '' traditionally sung by women , usually mezzo-sopranos .
Examples are Hansel in Hänsel und Gretel , Cherubino in The Marriage of Figaro and Octavian in Der Rosenkavalier .
Women in male roles are uncommon in film with the notable exceptions of the films The Year of Living Dangerously and I 'm Not There .
In the former film Linda Hunt played the pivotal role of Billy Kwan , for which she received the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress .
In the latter film Cate Blanchett portrayed Jude Quinn , a representation of Bob Dylan in the sixties , for which she was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress .
Women playing men in live theater is particularly common in presentations of older plays , such as those of Shakespeare , that have large numbers of male characters in roles where the gender no longer matters in modern times .
Having an actor dress as the opposite sex for comic effect is also a long-standing tradition in comic theater and film .
Most of Shakespeare 's comedies include instances of overt cross-dressing , such as Francis Flute in A Midsummer Night 's Dream .
The movie A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum stars Jack Gilford dressing as a young bride .
Tony Curtis and Jack Lemmon famously posed as women to escape gangsters in the Billy Wilder film Some Like It Hot .
Cross-dressing for comic effect was a frequently used device in most of the thirty Carry On films .
Dustin Hoffman and Robin Williams have each appeared in a hit comedy film ( Tootsie and Mrs. Doubtfire , respectively ) in which they played most scenes dressed as a woman .
Occasionally , the issue is further complicated , for example , by a woman playing a woman acting as a man pretending to be a woman , like Julie Andrews in Victor\/Victoria , or Gwyneth Paltrow in Shakespeare in Love .
In It 's Pat : The Movie , filmwatchers never learn the gender of the androgynous main characters Pat and Chris ( played by Julia Sweeney and Dave Foley ) .
A few roles in modern films , plays and musicals are played by a member of the opposite sex ( rather than a character cross-dressing ) , such as the character Edna Turnblad in Hairspray-played by Divine in the original film , Harvey Fierstein in the Broadway musical , and John Travolta in the 2007 movie musical .
Linda Hunt won an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress for playing Billy Kwan in The Year of Living Dangerously .
Felicity Huffman was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Actress for playing Bree Osbourne ( a male-to-female transsexual ) in Transamerica .
