Adolf von Henselt ( 12 May 1814 - 10 October 1889 ) was a German composer and pianist .
Henselt was born at Schwabach , in Bavaria .
At the age of three he began to learn the violin , and at five the piano under Josepha von Fladt .
On obtaining financial help from King Ludwig I of Bavaria he went to study under Johann Nepomuk Hummel in Weimar for some months , and thence in 1832 to Vienna , where , besides studying composition under Simon Sechter ( the later teacher of Anton Bruckner ) , he made a great success as a concert pianist .
In order to improve his health he made a prolonged tour in 1836 through the chief German towns .
In 1837 he settled at Breslau , where he had married Rosalie Vogel , but in the following year he migrated to Saint Petersburg , where previous visits had made him persona grata at Court .
He then became court pianist and inspector of musical studies in the Imperial Institute of Female Education , and was ennobled in 1876 .
He usually spent his summer holidays in his former homeland Germany .
In 1852 and again in 1867 he visited England , though in the latter year he made no public appearance .
Saint Petersburg was his home practically until his death , which occurred during a stay at Warmbrunn , Germany ( now in Poland ) , due to cardiac disease .
The characteristic of Henselt 's playing was a combination of Franz Liszt 's sonority with Hummel 's smoothness .
It was full of poetry , remarkable for the great use he made of extended chords , and for his perfect technique .
Indeed , his cantabile playing was unequalled : Liszt once commented on the lengths to which Henselt had gone to achieve his famous legato , saying , `` I could have had velvet paws like that if I had wanted to . ''
Henselt 's influence on the next generation of Russian pianists is immense .
It is in Henselt 's playing and teaching that the entire Russian school of music had its genesis , developing from the seeds planted by John Field .
Sergei Rachmaninoff held him in very great esteem , and considered him one of his most important influences .
He excelled in his own works and in those of Carl Maria von Weber and Frédéric Chopin .
His Piano Concerto in F minor , Op .
16 was once frequently played in Europe ; and of his many valuable studies , Si oiseau j' étais was very familiar .
At one time Henselt was second to Anton Rubinstein in the direction of the Saint Petersburg Conservatory .
However , despite his relatively long life , Henselt ceased all composition by the age of thirty .
The reasons are unclear .
Chronic stage fright , bordering on paranoia , caused him to withdraw from concert appearances by age thirty-three .
( selective list ) Variations on ` Io son ' ricco ' from Donizetti 's L'elisir d'amore , Op .
1 .
Douze études caractéristiques , Op .
2 .
Poème d'amour , Op .
3 .
Douze études de salon , Op .
5 .
Pensée fugitive , Op .
8 .
Scherzo in B minor , Op .
9 .
Romance in B-flat minor , Op .
10 .
Frühlingslied , Op .
15 .
Fantaisie sur un air bohemien-russe , Op .
16 .
Impromptu No. 1 , WoO .
Impromptu No. 2 , Op .
17 .
Vier Romanzen , Op .
18 .
Arrangements of 12 numbers from Weber 's operas Der Freischütz , Euryanthe and Oberon , Op .
19 .
Deux romances russes de Soumarokoff , Op .
22 .
Toccatina , Op .
25 .
Deux petites valses , Op .
28 .
Sophie polka , Op .
29 .
Chant sans paroles , Op .
33 .
Grande valse - L'aurore boréale , Op .
30 .
Ballade , Op .
31 .
Nocturne in A-flat major , Op .
32 .
Impromptu No. 3 in B-flat minor , Op .
34 .
Marche du couronnement d'Alexandre II , Op .
35 .
Valse mélancolique in D minor , Op .
36 .
Impromptu No. 4 in B-flat minor , Op .
37 .
