Aemilianus ( Latin : Marcus Aemilius Aemilianus Augustus ; c. 207\/213 - 253 ) , also known as Aemilian , was Roman Emperor for three months in 253 .
Commander of the Moesian troops , he obtained an important victory against the invading Goths and was , for this reason , acclaimed Emperor by his army .
He then moved quickly to Italy , where he defeated Emperor Trebonianus Gallus , only to be killed by his own men when another general , Valerian , proclaimed himself Emperor and moved against Aemilian with a larger army .
Aemilian was born in the Roman province of Africa .
According to the 4th century source Epitome de Caesaribus , he was born at Girba ( modern Djerba , an island off the coast of Tunisia ) and was a Moor ; a reference in the same source hints that he was born around 207 .
The 12th century historian Joannes Zonaras , who calls him a Libyan ( that is , coming from western Egypt-eastern Libya ) rather than a Moor , and another chronicle of the 13th century hold that he was forty at the time of his death in 253 .
As regards his lineage , there are two versions , both exaggerated : while Eutropius and his translator Paeanius probably defamate a failed usurper when they tell that he was from an insignificant family , John of Antioch may refer bits of Aemilian 's propaganda when he tells that the usurper used his ancestry to take the power .
Aemilian married Cornelia Supera , a woman of African origin ; the year of their marriage is unknown , but being both from the same place , it is possible they married before Aemilian left Africa .
During the reign of Trebonianus Gallus and his son Volusianus ( 251-253 ) , Aemilian was sent to the Balkans to command an army .
His primary responsibility was to assure peace along the Danube frontier , which had been subject to several attacks by the Goths led by king Cniva .
Gallus secured the throne after the death of emperor Decius at the hands of Cniva in the battle of Abrittus ( 251 ) , and later had to manage an outbreak of plague that devastated Rome .
He was not popular with the army , mainly due to humiliating treaties signed in 251 with the Goths and King Shapur I of Persia who attacked Syria .
According to John of Antioch , upon his appointment to the Moesian command , Aemilian was already envious of Gallus and plotted treachery against him .
He was also an opponent of the Roman Senate ; and his seditious plans are confirmed by Jerome and Jordanes .
In 253 the Goths , led by king Cniva , protested not having received the tribute due by the Romans according to the treaty of 251 and crossed the border , attacking Cappadocia , Pessinus , and Ephesus ; the opinion of modern historians is that this missing payment was not a change in Roman policy , and the Goths were more likely trying to capitalize on their military prowess .
Aemilian had command of the army assigned to defend the area .
However , the recent defeat at the battle of Abrittus put his troops on edge .
Aemilian exhorted them , reminding them of Roman honor ( according to Zosimus ) and promising tribute from the Goths ( according to Zonaras ) .
The Romans took the Goths by surprise , killing most of them , followed by an invasion of their territory which resulted in booty and the liberation of prisoners .
The Roman soldiers , gathered by Aemilian , acclaimed him Emperor .
Jordanes claims , however , that Aemilian 's troops plundered Roman territory , rather than keep the tribute of the Goths .
With his few men , Aemilian could hardly wait for the legitimate emperor Gallus to gather his forces , so he left his province unguarded and , with all his men , moved quickly towards Rome , to meet his opponent before he could receive reinforcements .
While Aemilian descended upon Rome along the Flaminian Way , Trebonianus Gallus and his son and colleague Volusianus had him proclaimed `` enemy of the State '' by the Roman senate , then exited Rome to meet the usurper ; this strategy is a clue that Aemilian 's army was smaller than theirs , as it is probable that they did not expect the reinforcements to come in time , but trusted their larger army to win the clash .
The two armies met at Interamna Nahars ( modern Terni ) , at the southern end of the eastern branch of the Flaminia , and Aemilian won the battle ; Gallus and Volusianus fled with few followers towards north , probably to gather time before the arrival of the reinforcements , but at Forum Flaminii ( modern San Giovanni Profiamma ) , on the western branch of Flaminia , they were killed by some of their own guards , who thought that their betrayal could earn them a reward .
Aemilian moved towards Rome ; here the Roman senate , after a short opposition , decided to recognize him as emperor .
According to some sources , after his recognition Aemilian wrote to the Senate , promising to fight for the Empire in Thrace and against Persia , and to relinquish his power to the Senate , of which he considered himself a general .
Aemilian received the titles of Pius , Felix and Pater Patriae , the tribunicia potestas , and was elevated to the rank of pontifex maximus ; however , he was not elevated to consulate ( possibly a hint of his non-senatorial birth ) .
His coinage shows that his propaganda was centred around his capability as military commander ; he had been able to defeat the Goths while nobody even believed this possible , and thus he was the right man for the job of restoring the power of the Roman Empire .
However , Valerian , the governor of the Rhine provinces , was on his way south with an army , which according to Zosimus , had been called in as a reinforcement by Gallus .
But modern historians believe this army , possibly mobilized for an incumbent campaign in the East , moved only after Gallus ' death to support its general 's bid for power .
Emperor Aemilian 's men , fearful of a civil war and Valerian 's larger force , mutinied .
Aemilian was killed by them at Spoletium or the Sanguinarium bridge , between Oriculum and Narnia ( half way between Spoletium and Rome ) , and recognized Valerian as the new emperor .
After his death , which happened between late July and mid-September , a damnatio memoriae against Aemilian was declared .
It is possible that the usurper Silbannacus was an officer left by Aemilian in Rome before moving against Valerian , who later tried to become emperor but then was killed .
The troubled administration of this emperor was perhaps best summed up by Eutropius :
