Holozoa African elephants are the elephants of the genus Loxodonta ( Greek for ` oblique-sided tooth ' ) , consisting of two extant species , the African bush elephant and the smaller African forest elephant .
Loxodonta is one of the two existing genera in the family Elephantidae .
Although it is commonly believed that the genus was named by Georges Cuvier in 1825 , Cuvier spelled it Loxodonte .
An anonymous author romanized the spelling to Loxodonta and the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature ( ICZN ) recognizes this as the proper authority .
Fossil members of Loxodonta have only been found in Africa , where they developed in the middle Pliocene .
The African elephant is the largest living terrestrial animal .
Its thickset body rests on stocky legs and it has a concave back .
Its large ears enable heat loss .
Its upper lip and nose forms a trunk .
The trunk acts as a fifth limb , a sound amplifier and an important method of touch .
The African elephant 's trunk ends in two opposing lips , whereas the Asian elephant trunk ends in a single lip .
African bush elephants are bigger than Asian elephants .
Males stand 3.2-4 .0 m ( 10-13 ft ) tall at the shoulder and weigh 4,700-6 ,048 kg ( 10,000-13 ,330 lb ) , while females stand 2.2-2 .6 m ( 7.2-8 .5 ft ) tall and weigh 2,160-3 ,232 kg ( 4,800-7 ,130 lb ) .
The largest individual recorded stood four metres to the shoulders and weighed ten tonnes .
Elephants have four molars ; each weighs about 5 kg ( 11 lb ) and measures about 30 cm ( 12 in ) long .
As the front pair wears down and drops out in pieces , the back pair shifts forward , and two new molars emerge in the back of the mouth .
Elephants replace their teeth six times .
At about 40 to 60 years of age , the elephant no longer has teeth and will likely die of starvation , a common cause of death .
Their tusks are firm teeth ; the second set of incisors become the tusks .
They are used for digging for roots and stripping the bark off trees for food , for fighting each other during mating season , and for defending themselves against predators .
The tusks weigh from 23-45 kg ( 51-99 lb ) and can be from 1.5-2 .4 m ( 5-8 ft ) long .
Unlike Asian elephants , both male and female African elephants have tusks .
They are curved forward and continue to grow throughout the elephant 's lifetime .
The enamel plates of the molars are fewer in number than in Asian elephants .
African elephants can eat up to 450 kilograms of vegetation per day though their digestive system is not very efficient and only 40 % of this food is properly digested .
They use their trunk to pluck at leaves and their tusks to tear at branches , which can cause enormous damage .
African elephants are highly intelligent , and they have a very large and highly convoluted neocortex , a trait also shared by humans , apes and certain dolphin species .
They are amongst the world 's most intelligent species .
With a mass of just over 5 kg ( 11 lb ) , elephant brains are larger than those of any other land animal , and although the largest whales have body masses twenty-fold those of a typical elephant , whale brains are barely twice the mass of an elephant 's brain .
The elephant 's brain is similar to that of humans in terms of structure and complexity - such as the elephant 's cortex having as many neurons as a human brain , suggesting convergent evolution .
Elephants exhibit a wide variety of behaviors , including those associated with grief , learning , allomothering , mimicry , art , play , a sense of humor , altruism , use of tools , compassion , cooperation , self-awareness , memory and possibly language .
All point to a highly intelligent species that are thought to be equal with cetaceans and primates .
