African elephants are the two species of elephants in the genus Loxodonta , one of the two existing genera in Elephantidae .
Although it is commonly believed that the genus was named by Georges Cuvier in 1825 , Cuvier spelled it Loxodonte .
An anonymous author romanized the spelling to Loxodonta and the ICZN recognizes this as the proper authority .
Fossil Loxodonta have only been found in Africa , where they developed in the middle Pliocene .
Males stand 3.64 meters ( 12 feet ) tall at the shoulder and weigh 5455 kg ( 12,000 lbs ) , while females stand 3 meters ( 10 feet ) and weigh 3636 kg to 4545 kg ( 8,000 to 10,000 lbs ) .
The largest bulls will weigh 24,000 pounds ( 12 tons ) and stand a little over ( 13 feet ) at the shoulder .
Elephants have four molars , each weighs about 11 lbs and measures about 12 inches long .
The front pair wear down and drop out in pieces as the Two new molars emerge in the back of the mouth and the old molars shift forward .
to replace those that dropped out .
Elephants replace their teeth six times .
At about 40 to 60 years of age the elephant no longer has teeth and will likely die of starvation , a common cause of death .
Their tusks are teeth , the second set of incisors become the tusks .
They are used for digging for roots and stripping the bark off trees for food , and , fighting each other during mating season , or defending themselves against predators .
They weigh from 50-100 pounds and can be from can be from 5 to 8 feet long .
Both bulls and cows have tusks .
.
Loxodonta adaurora , extinct , presumed antecedent of the modern African elephants .
African Bush Elephant ( Loxodonta africana ) .
African Forest Elephant ( Loxodonta cyclotis ) .
Bush and Forest Elephants were formerly considered subspecies of the same species Loxodonta africana .
However , they are nowadays generally considered to be two distinct species .
The African Forest Elephant has a longer and narrower mandible , rounder ears , a different number of toenails , straighter and downward tusks , and considerably smaller size .
With regard to the number of toenails : the African Bush Elephant normally has 4 toenails on the front foot and 3 on the hind foot , the African Forest Elephant normally has 5 toenails on the front foot and 4 on the hind foot ( like the Asian elephant ) , but hybrids between the two species commonly occur .
Poaching significantly reduced the population of Loxodonta in certain regions during the 20th century .
An example of this poaching pressure is in the eastern region of Chad-elephant herds there were substantial as recently as 1970 , with an estimated population of 400,000 ; however , by 2006 the number had dwindled to about 10,000 .
The African elephant nominally has governmental protection , but poaching is still a serious issue .
Human encroachment into or adjacent to natural areas where bush elephants occur has led to recent research into methods of safely driving groups of elephants away from humans , including the discovery that playback of the recorded sounds of angry honey bees are remarkably effective at prompting elephants to flee an area .
Some elephant communities have grown so large , in Africa , that some communities have resulted to culling large amounts to help sustain the ecosystem .
All in all African elephants are some of the smartest land animales in the world .
