For the braconid wasp genus , see Agathis ( wasp ) .
For details on New Zealand Kauri , see Agathis australis The type of gastropod marine mollusc is spelled cowrie , while the New Zealand land mollusc is spelled Kauri .
The genus Agathis , commonly known as kauri or dammar , is a relatively small genus of 21 species of evergreen tree .
The genus is part of the ancient Araucariaceae family of conifers , a group once widespread during the Jurassic period , but now largely restricted to the Southern Hemisphere except for a number of extant Malesian Agathis .
Mature kauri trees have characteristically large trunks , forming a bole with little or no branching below the crown .
In contrast , young trees are normally conical in shape , forming a more rounded or irregularly shaped crown as they achieve maturity .
The bark is smooth and light gray to grey-brown , usually peeling into irregular flakes that become thicker on more mature trees .
The branch structure is often horizontal or , when larger , ascending .
The lowest branches often leave circular branch scars when they detach from the lower trunk .
The juvenile leaves in all species are larger than the adult , more or less acute , varying among the species from ovate to lanceolate .
Adult leaves are opposite , elliptical to linear , very leathery and quite thick .
Young leaves are often a coppery-red , contrasting markedly with the usually green or glaucous-green foliage of the previous season .
The male pollen cones appear usually only on larger trees after seed cones have appeared .
The female seed cones usually develop on short lateral branchlets , maturing after two years .
They are normally oval or globe shaped .
Seeds of some species are attacked by the caterpillars of Agathiphaga , some of the most primitive of all living moths .
Various species of kauri give diverse resins such as kauri copal , Manilla copal and Dammar gum .
The timber is generally straight-grained and of fine quality with an exceptional strength-to-weight ratio and rot resistance , making it ideal for yacht hull construction .
The wood is commonly used in the manufacture of low priced guitars due to its good resonating properties , yet relatively low price of production .
It is also used for some Go boards ( goban ) .
The uses of the New Zealand species ( A. australis ) included shipbuilding , house construction , wood panelling , furniture making , mine braces , and railway sleepers .
