The title is often abbreviated to Akilam or Akilathirattu .
Akilam including more than 15000 verses , is the largest Ammanai literature in Tamil and one among the largest works in Tamil which are contributed by a single author .
According to the book , Akilam , Hari Gopalan Citar wrote this book on the twenty-seventh day of the Tamil month of Karthikai ( November\/December ) in the year 1841 CE .
The author claims that God woke him up during his sleep and commissioned him to take dictation of what he said .
Akilathirattu was recorded on palm leaves until 1939 , when it was given printed form .
According to the author , the book is the story of God coming in this age , the Kali Yukam or Iron Age , to rule the world by transforming it into the Dharma Yukam .
This story of faith has woven together the historical facts about Ayya Vaikundar and his activities with reinterpretations of episodes from the Hindu Puranas ( mythologies ) and Itihasas ( epics ) .
It is presented as if Vishnu is narrating the whole story to his consort Lakshmi .
Though the Citar Hari Gopalan wrote the book Akilam , he claimed that he did not know any thing about the contents of the book .
He woke up in the morning as usual and he did n't know what he had written the day before .
Another legend says that he began it that night and continued through the following days .
Others say that it was written beginning on Friday , 26th Karthikai ( Tamil Calendar ) 1016 M. E , and completed on seventeenth day on the second Sunday of Margazhi ( Tamil Calendar ) 1016 M.E. .
When Ayya Vaikundar died , the tied-up palm leaf manuscript , which was until then not opened , was unfolded .
It contained the regulations of the Ayyavazhi sect .
As per the instructions found there in Akilam , Ayyavazhi was preached by the Citars far and wide .
Akilam is in two parts ; the first is an account of the ages preceding that of the present age , the Kali Yukam , and the second is an account of the activities of Ayya Vaikundar leading up to his attaining Vaikundam .
Akilathirattu is written as a poem in the Tamil language .
The narration alternates between two sub-genres called viruttam and natai .
Both sub-genres employ many poetic devices like alliteration and hyperbatons .
It contains more than 15000 verse making up seventeen section .
In a typical Ammanai style , Akilam maintains more than one context for its verses throughout the text .
While the floating ideas of the lines could be comparatively easily communicated , the underlying theme could n't be understood unless oneself is understood and well aware about the basics of Hindu pantheon of gods , Hindu scriptures , Dharmic concepts and philosophy etc. .
The texts written by Hari Gopalan Citar are seen as damaged and it is hard to read the contents .
It is still preserved as a relic by his descendents .
There are three direct versions which were copied from this first version .
They are , Panchalagkuricchi Version .
Swamithoppe Version .
Kottangadu Version .
Of these , the Panchalankuricchi Version is believed to be written down by Hari Gopalan Citar by copying from the main version and the other two versions were copied later .
Apart from these the Nariyan vilai Version , Varampetran-pantaram Version , Saravanantheri Version are the other early palm-leaf versions of Akilam .
Other release versions include the Palaramachandran version , the VTV published twice , the Kalai Ilakkiya-peravai Version and the Vivekanandan Version .
But of these , The Ayya Vaikundar Thirukkudumbam version is often criticised for the removal and adding of additional Verse ( poetry ) s from various versions .
It was argued that such additions and removals are made in over 300 pages .
All the release versions except Palaramachandran version schedules the whole contents to seventeen sections as per the Thiru Eadu-vasippu partition .
The Sentrathisai Ventraperumal version which was released in 1965 includes more than 2000 verse which were not found in other versions .
The Palaramachandran version is the widely accepted and the largest circulated version .
The book focuses on the devotion to Vaikundar , considered to be an aspect of the God Vishnu .
It is a poetic narrative in Tamil intended to be an excellent compilation of the various aspects of Indian mythology and beliefs about God .
The first 8 chapters of the book narrates the events starting from the creation of the Universe to the time exactly before the incarnation of Vaikundar .
The ninth chapter describes in detail the events taking place in the divine plan during the incarnation of Vaikundar .
The last 8 chapters focus of the legendary , empirical , historical and mythical aspects pertaining to the life of Vaikundar .
The book starts with the explanation given by Vishnu to His consort Lakshmi about the evolution of Universe and of human beings .
It is said that there is a total of 8 aeons or yugas and we are currently in the seventh yuga called as Kali Yuga , the age of deterioration .
It is believed that for each yuga there is a demon that will be destroyed by Vishnu .
In the first yuga , Kroni was born .
This Kroni is cognate with the concept of Satan in Abrahamic religions .
Vishnu fragmented him into six pieces and each fragments will incarnate as demon in each Yuga .
The first four yugas are said to be the Neetiya Yuga , Chatura Yuga , Nedu Yuga and Kretha Yuga .
These four yugas do not have parallels in the mainstream Hindu mythology .
The fifth yuga is said to be the Treta Yuga in which the Lord Rama incarnated as human .
The sixth yuga is the Dvapara Yuga , and there is a short but striking description of the life of Krishna and the Bharatha war .
Additionally there is said to be another event called the birth of Santror or noble people at the closure of Dvapara Yuga .
Kali Yuga , the seventh Yuga begins when the evil spirit called Kali ( not to be confused with Kaali , the mother goddess ) was born .
Kali is believed to be cognate with the modern human beings .
Then was born the Neesan , the demon for the Kali Yuga .
It is said that this demon became the king of earth in various places and tortured the lives of the Santror .
Because of this Lord Vishnu got angry and advised Neesan to stop torturing the Santror .
But he wo n't agree to Vishnu and would prefer to die rather than giving up .
In order to stop the rule of Neesan and to bring an end to Kali yuga , Vishnu made a plan to make Vaikundar incarnate as human .
Vaikundar is believed to be the Son of Vishnu and Lakshmi .
He was beget inside the sea , and sent as human into the land .
From the point of incarnation of Vaikundar , it is said that He was made the supreme of all godhead , and will destroy Neesan and also the evil Kali Yuga .
It is also said that he will take all righteous people with him into the Vaikundam in the eighth yuga called as Dharma Yukam .
Also , nothing is said about the period which follows Dharma yuga , which means that timeline is linear , and not circular as believed inside mainstream Hinduism .
