Alcina ( HWV 34 ) is an opera seria by George Frideric Handel .
Handel used the libretto of L'isola di Alcina , an opera that was set in 1728 in Rome by Riccardo Broschi , which he acquired the year after , during his travels in Italy .
The plot was originally taken from - but partly altered for better conformity - Ludovico Ariosto 's Orlando furioso ( like those of the Handel operas Orlando and Ariodante ) , an epic poem set in the time of Charlemagne 's wars against Islam .
The opera contains several musical sequences with opportunity for dance : these were composed for dancer Marie Sallé .
Alcina was composed for Handel 's first season at the Covent Garden Theatre , London .
It premiered on April 16 , 1735 .
Like the composer 's other works in the opera seria genre , it fell into obscurity ; after a revival in Brunswick in 1738 it was not performed again until a production in Leipzig in 1928 .
The Australian soprano Joan Sutherland sang the role in a production by Franco Zeffirelli in which she made her debut at La Fenice in February 1960 and at the Dallas Opera in November of that year .
She performed in the same production at the Royal Opera House , Covent Garden , in 1962 .
It was performed at Ledlanet , Scotland , in 1969 .
A major production was that of Robert Carsen , staged originally for the Opera de Paris in 1999 and repeated at the Lyric Opera of Chicago , which featured Renée Fleming in the title role .
The background of the opera comes from the poem Orlando Furioso .
The heroic knight Ruggiero is destined to a short but glorious life , and a benevolent magician is always whisking him away from the arms of his fiancée , Bradamante .
Bradamante is not the type to put up with the constant disappearance of her lover , and she spends vast portions of the poem in full armor chasing after him .
Just before the opera begins she has rescued him from an enchanted castle , only to have her flying horse ( a hippogriff ) take a fancy to Ruggiero and fly off with him .
Ruggiero and the hippogriff land on an island in the middle of the ocean .
As the hippogriff begins to eat the leaves of a myrtle bush , Ruggiero is startled to hear the bush begin to speak .
The bush reveals that it was once a living soul named Sir Astolfo , and the island belongs to the sister sorceresses Alcina and Morgana .
The beautiful Alcina seduces every knight that lands on her isle , but soon tires of her lovers and changes them into stones , animals , plants , or anything that strikes her fancy .
Despite Astolfo 's warning , Ruggiero strides off to meet this sorceress - and falls under her spell .
Bradamante , again searching for her lover , arrives on Alcina 's island with Ruggiero 's former tutor , Melisso .
Dressed in armor , Bradamante looks like a young man and goes by the name of her own brother , Ricciardo .
She and Melisso possess a magic ring which enables the wearer to see through illusion , which they plan to use to break Alcina 's spells and release her captives .
The first person they meet is the sorceress Morgana .
Barely human and with no understanding of true love , she immediately abandons her own lover Oronte for the handsome ` Ricciardo . '
Morgana conveys the visitors to Alcina 's court , where Bradamante is dismayed to discover that Ruggiero is besotted with Alcina and in a state of complete amnesia about his previous life .
Also at Alcina 's court is a boy , Oberto , who is looking for his father , Astolfo , who was last seen heading toward this island .
Bradamante guesses that Astolfo is now transformed into something , but she holds her peace and concerns herself with Ruggiero .
Bradamante and Melisso rebuke Ruggiero for his desertion , but he ca n't think of anything except Alcina .
Meanwhile , Oronte discovers that Morgana has fallen in love with ` Ricciardo , ' and challenges ` him ' to a duel .
Morgana stops the fight , but Oronte is in a foul mood and takes it out on Ruggiero .
He tells the young man exactly how Alcina treats her former lovers and adds that , as far as he can tell , Alcina has fallen in love with the newcomer , Ricciardo .
Ruggiero is horrified and overwhelms Alcina with his jealous fury .
Things get even worse when ` Ricciardo ' enters and pretends to admire Alcina .
Alcina calms Ruggiero , but Bradamante is so upset at seeing her fiancé wooed before her very eyes that she reveals her true identity to Ruggiero .
Melisso hastily contradicts her and Ruggiero becomes very confused .
Alcina tells Morgana that she plans to turn Ricciardo into an animal , just to show Ruggiero how much she really loves him .
Morgana begs Ricciardo to escape the island and Alcina 's clutches , but ` he ' says he 'd rather stay , as he loves another .
Morgana believes that this other person is herself , and the act ends with her triumphant aria `` Tornami a vagheggiar . ''
Melisso recalls Ruggiero to reason and duty by letting him wear the magic ring : under its influence , Ruggiero sees the island as it really is-a desert , peopled with monsters .
Appalled , he realizes he must leave , and sings the famous aria `` Verdi prati '' ( `` Green meadows '' ) where he admits that even though he knows the island and Alcina are mere illusion , their beauty will haunt him for the rest of his life .
Melisso warns Ruggiero that he ca n't just leave ; Alcina still wields immense power , and he should cover his escape by telling her that he wishes to go hunting .
Ruggiero agrees , but , thoroughly bewildered by the magic and illusion surrounding him , he refuses to believe his eyes when he at last sees Bradamante as herself , believing that she may be another of Alcina 's illusions .
Bradamante is in despair , as is Alcina .
Convinced of Ruggiero 's indifference , she enters to turn Ricciardo into an animal , and Ruggiero has to pull himself together quickly and convince the sorceress that he does n't need any proof of her love .
It is at this point that the audience realizes that Alcina genuinely loves Ruggiero ; from now until the end of the opera , she is depicted sympathetically .
Oronte realizes that Ricciardo , Melisso and Ruggiero are in some sort of alliance , and Morgana and Alcina realize they are being deceived .
But it is too late : Alcina 's powers depend on illusion and , as true love enters her life , her magic powers slip away .
As the act ends , Alcina tries to call up evil spirits to stop Ruggiero from leaving her , but her magic fails her .
After this the opera finishes swiftly .
Morgana and Oronte try to rebuild their relationship ; she returns to him and he rebuffs her but ( once she is offstage ) admits he loves her still .
Ruggiero returns to his proper heroic status and sings an aria accompanied by high horns ; Oberto is introduced to a lion , to whom he feels strangely attached , and Alcina sings a desolate aria in which she longs for oblivion .
Bradamante and Ruggiero decide that they need to destroy the source of Alcina 's magic , usually represented as an urn .
Alcina pleads with them , but Ruggiero is deaf to her appeals and smashes the urn .
As he does so , everything is both ruined and restored .
Alcina 's magic palace crumbles to dust and she and Morgana sink into the ground , but Alcina 's lovers are returned to their proper selves .
The lion turns into Oberto 's father , Astolfo , and other people stumble on , `` I was a rock , '' says one , `` I a tree '' says another , and `` I a wave in the ocean ... '' All the humans sing of their relief and joy , and Alcina is forgotten .
