Alfons Maria Mucha ( Czech pronunciation : ( ˈalfons ˈmuxa ) ( listen ) ; 24 July 1860 - 14 July 1939 ) , known in English as Alphonse Mucha , was a Czech Art Nouveau painter and decorative artist , known best for his distinct style .
He produced many paintings , illustrations , advertisements , postcards , and designs .
Alphonse Maria Mucha was born in the town of Ivančice , Moravia ( the present Czech Republic ) .
Although his singing abilities allowed him to continue his education through high school in the Moravian capital of Brno , drawing had been his main hobby since childhood .
He worked at decorative painting jobs in Moravia , mostly painting theatrical scenery .
In 1879 , he relocated to Vienna to work for a major Viennese theatrical design company , while informally augmenting his artistic education .
When a fire destroyed his employer 's business during 1881 he returned to Moravia , to do freelance decorative and portrait painting .
Count Karl Khuen of Mikulov hired Mucha to decorate Hrušovany Emmahof Castle with murals , and was impressed enough that he agreed to sponsor Mucha 's formal training at the Munich Academy of Fine Arts .
Mucha moved to Paris in 1887 , and continued his studies at Académie Julian and Académie Colarossi .
In addition to his studies , he worked at producing magazine and advertising illustrations .
About Christmas 1894 , Mucha happened to go into a print shop where there was a sudden and unexpected need for a new advertising poster for a play featuring Sarah Bernhardt , the most famous actress in Paris , at the Théâtre de la Renaissance on the Boulevard Saint-Martin .
Mucha volunteered to produce a lithographed poster within two weeks , and on 1 January 1895 , the advertisement for the play Gismonda by Victorien Sardou was posted in the city , where it attracted much attention .
Bernhardt was so satisfied with the success of this first poster that she began a six-year contract with Mucha .
Mucha produced a flurry of paintings , posters , advertisements , and book illustrations , as well as designs for jewelry , carpets , wallpaper , and theater sets in what was termed initially the Mucha Style but became known as Art Nouveau ( French for ` new art ' ) .
Mucha 's works frequently featured beautiful young women in flowing , vaguely Neoclassical-looking robes , often surrounded by lush flowers which sometimes formed halos behind their heads .
In contrast with contemporary poster makers he used pale pastel colors .
The 1900 Universal Exhibition in Paris spread the `` Mucha style '' internationally , of which Mucha said `` I think ( the Exposition Universelle ) made some contribution toward bringing aesthetic values into arts and crafts . ''
He decorated the Bosnia and Herzegovina Pavilion and collaborated with decorating the Austrian Pavilion .
His Art Nouveau style was often imitated .
The Art Nouveau style however , was one that Mucha attempted to disassociate himself from throughout his life ; he always insisted that rather than maintaining any fashionable stylistic form , his paintings were entirely a product of himself and Czech art .
He declared that art existed only to communicate a spiritual message , and nothing more ; hence his frustration at the fame he gained by his commercial art , when he most wanted to concentrate on more artistic projects .
Mucha married Maruška ( Marie\/Maria ) Chytilová on 10 June 1906 , in Prague .
The couple visited the U.S. from 1906 to 1910 , during which time their daughter , Jaroslava , was born in New York City .
They also had a son , Jiří , ( born 12 March 1915 in Prague ; died 5 April 1991 in Prague ) who later became a well known journalist , writer , screenwriter , author of autobiographical novels and studies of the works of his father .
In the U.S. , Alphonse expected to earn money to fund his nationalistic projects to demonstrate to Czechs that he had not `` sold out '' .
He was assisted by millionaire Charles R. Crane , who used his fortune to help promote revolutions and , after meeting Thomas Masaryk , Slavic nationalism .
Alphonse and his family returned to the Czech lands and settled in Prague , where he decorated the Theater of Fine Arts , contributed his time and talent to create the murals in the Mayor 's Office at the Municipal House , and other landmarks around the city .
When Czechoslovakia won its independence after World War I , Mucha designed the new postage stamps , banknotes , and other government documents for the new state .
Mucha considered his publication Le Pater to be his printed masterpiece , and referred to it in The Sun of 5 January 1900 as what he had `` put ( his ) soul into '' .
Printed on 20 December 1899 , Le Pater was Mucha 's occult examination of the themes of The Lord 's Prayer and only 510 copies were produced .
Mucha spent many years working on what he considered his life 's fine art masterpiece , The Slav Epic ( Slovanská epopej ) , a series of twenty huge paintings depicting the history of the Czech and the Slavic people in general , bestowed to the city of Prague in 1928 .
He had wanted to complete a series such as this , a celebration of Slavic history , since he was young .
Since 1963 the series has been on display in the chateau in Moravský Krumlov the South Moravian Region in the Czech Republic .
The rising tide of fascism during the late 1930s resulted in Mucha 's works , as well as his Slavic nationalism , being denounced in the press as ` reactionary ' .
When German troops moved into Czechoslovakia during the spring of 1939 , Mucha was among the first persons to be arrested by the Gestapo .
During his interrogation , the aging artist became ill with pneumonia .
Though released eventually , he may have been weakened by this event .
He died in Prague on 14 July 1939 , due to lung infection , and was interred there in the Vyšehrad cemetery .
