Sir Andrew Fielding Huxley , OM , FRS ( 22 November 1917 - 30 May 2012 ) was a Nobel Prize-winning English physiologist and biophysicist .
Huxley was born in Hampstead , London , England on November 22 , 1917 , he was the youngest son of the writer and editor Leonard Huxley by his second wife Rosalind Bruce , and hence half-brother of the writer Aldous Huxley and fellow biologist Julian Huxley , and grandson of the biologist T. H. Huxley .
He was educated at Westminster School in Central London , where he was a King 's Scholar , before going to study Natural Sciences at Trinity College , Cambridge .
In 1947 he married Jocelyn Richenda Gammell ( Chenda ) Pease ( 1925-2003 ) , the daughter of the geneticist Michael Pease and his wife Helen Bowen Wedgwood , a daughter of the first Lord Wedgwood , and is thus affiliated with the Darwin-Wedgwood family .
Lady Huxley had notable connections to scientific dynasties and Fabian socialism .
She was sister of Rendel Sebastian `` Bas '' Pease , and a niece of the anthropological Camilla Wedgwood , as well as daughter of a geneticist .
They have one son and five daughters : Janet Rachel Huxley ( born 20 April 1948 ) Stewart Leonard Huxley ( born 19 December 1949 ) Camilla Rosalind Huxley ( born 12 March 1952 ) Eleanor Bruce Huxley ( born 21 February 1959 ) Henrietta Catherine Huxley ( born 25 December 1960 ) Clare Marjory Pease Huxley ( born 4 November 1962 ) He won the 1963 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for his experimental and mathematical work with Alan Hodgkin on the basis of nerve action potentials , the electrical impulses that enable the activity of an organism to be coordinated by a central nervous system .
Hodgkin and Huxley shared the prize that year with John Eccles , who was cited for research on synapses .
Hodgkin and Huxley 's findings led the pair to hypothesize the existence of ion channels , which were isolated only decades later .
Together with the Swiss physiologist Robert Stämpfli he evidenced the existence of saltatory conduction in myelinated nerve fibers .
Huxley was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society on 17 March 1955 .
He was knighted by Queen Elizabeth II on 12 November 1974 .
Sir Andrew was then appointed to the Order of Merit on 11 November 1983 .
The experimental measurements on which the pair based their action potential theory represent one of the earliest applications of a technique of electrophysiology known as the voltage clamp .
The second critical element of their research used the giant axon of the Atlantic squid ( Loligo pealei ) , which enabled them to record ionic currents as they would not have been able to do in almost any other neuron , such cells being too small to study by the techniques of the time .
The experiments started at the University of Cambridge , beginning in 1935 with frog sciatic nerve , and soon after they continued their work using squid giant axons at the Marine Biological Association Laboratory in Plymouth .
In 1939 , reporting work done in Plymouth , Alan Hodgkin and Andrew Huxley published a short paper in the journal Nature announcing their achievement of recording action potentials from inside a nerve fiber .
Research was interrupted by World War II but after resuming their experimental work in Plymouth , the pair published their theory in 1952 .
In the paper , they describe one of the earliest computational models in biochemistry , that is the basis of most of the models used in Neurobiology during the following four decades .
He continued to hold college and university posts in Cambridge until 1960 , when he became head of the Department of Physiology at University College London .
For his research , in 1963 he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine .
In 1969 he was appointed to a Royal Society Research Professorship which he holds in the Department of Physiology at University College London .
He maintained up to his death his position as a fellow at Trinity College , Cambridge , teaching in physiology , natural sciences and medicine .
He was also a fellow of Imperial College London in 1980 .
From his experimental work with Hodgkin , Huxley developed a set of differential equations that provided a mathematical explanation for nerve impulses-the `` action potential '' .
This work provided the foundation for the all of the current work on voltage-sensitive membrane channels , which are responsible for the functioning of animal nervous systems .
Quite separately , he developed the mathematical equations for the operation of myosin `` cross-bridges '' that generate the sliding forces between actin and myosin filaments , which cause the contraction of skeletal muscles .
These equations presented an entirely new paradigm for understanding muscle contraction , which has been extended to provide our understanding of almost all of the movements produced by cells above the level of bacteria .
Huxley died in 2012 in his home of Grantchester , Cambridgeshire , England from unknown causes .
He was survived by his six children , grandchildren , and great-grandchildren .
His wife Richenda , Lady Huxley died in 2003 .
A memorial service was held in Trinity College , Cambridge , and the physiologist was buried on the grounds of the college 's campus .
