Coordinates : 47 ° 28 ′ 25 ″ N 0 ° 33 ′ 15 ″ W \/ 47.4736 ° N 0.5542 ° W \/ 47.4736 ; -0.5542 Angers ( French pronunciation : ( ɑ̃ .
ʒe ) ) is the main city in the Maine-et-Loire department in western France about 300 km ( 190 mi ) south-west of Paris .
Angers is located in the French region known by its pre-revolutionary , provincial name , Anjou , and its inhabitants are called Angevins .
Angers proper has a population of 157,000 inhabitants , while c. 283,000 live in its metropolitan area .
The city traces its roots to early Roman times .
It occupies both banks of the Maine , which is spanned by six bridges .
The district along the river has flourishing nurseries and market gardens .
It is known for its fresh produce and cut flowers .
The first sign of human presence on the site of Angers is a stone tool dated back to 400,000 BCE ( Lower Paleolithic ) .
The earliest known inhabitants were the Andecavi , a Gallic tribe that was overrun by the Romans .
The city , while under Roman rule , was called Juliomagus .
The Council of Angers was held here in 453 .
The city suffered severely from the invasions of the Vikings in 845 and succeeding years .
Angers was once the capital of the historic province of Anjou .
Beginning in the 9th century , the region was controlled by a powerful family of feudal lords .
It is the cradle of the House of Plantagenet who ruled England from the twelfth century and gave name to the Angevin Kings of England .
During this time the Hospital of Saint-Jean was built in Angers by King Henry II of England .
The edifice still stands to this day , now housing an important museum .
In 1204 Angers was conquered by King Philippe II .
An enormous castle , the Château d'Angers , was built during the minority of Louis IX ( `` Saint Louis '' ) in the early part of the 13th century .
In 1352 , John II le Bon , gave the château to his son , Louis I. Married to the daughter of the wealthy Duke of Brittany , Louis I had the château modified , and in 1373 commissioned the famous Apocalypse Tapestry from the painter Hennequin de Bruges and the Parisian tapestry-weaver Nicolas Bataille .
In the early 15th century , the dauphin who became King Charles VII , had to flee Paris and was given sanctuary at the Château D'Angers .
Louis II and Yolande d'Aragon added a chapel ( 1405-12 ) and royal apartments to the castle .
The chapel is a sainte chapelle , the name given to churches which enshrined a relic of the Passion .
The relic at Angers was a splinter of the fragment of the True Cross which had been acquired by Louis IX .
The Huguenots took the city of Angers in 1585 , and the Vendean royalists were defeated nearby in 1793 during the siege of Angers .
Until the French Revolution Angers was the seat of a celebrated university founded in the 14th century .
During the 16th and 17th centuries the Château D'Angers served originally as a defensive castle , and later as a military training school .
The military role of the Chateau D'Angers castle was revived in the 20th century when it was used by the Nazi government of Germany to store arms , ammunition , and explosives .
During the war , the latter exploded , causing significant amounts of damage to the castle .
In addition to the massive Château d'Angers , the city is also noted for the impressive twin spires of the twelfth-century Cathedral of Saint-Maurice .
Other noteworthy churches around Angers include St. Serge , an abbey-church of the 12th and 15th centuries , and the twelfth-century La Trinité Cathedral .
The elaborately sculptured eleventh and 12th century arcades of the famous abbey of Saint Aubin survive in the courtyard of the Prefecture and Hotel du Departement .
The tower of the abbey church has also survived nearby .
Ruins of the old churches of Toussaint ( 13th century ) and Notre-Dame du Ronceray ( eleventh century ) are also nearby .
The ancient hospital of St. Jean ( twelfth century ) is occupied by Jean Lurcat 's tapestries .
The Logis Barrault , a mansion built in 1486-92 , houses the Musée des Beaux-Arts , which has a large collection of paintings and sculptures .
In 1984 the former abbey church of Toussaint became the Musee David d'Angers consisting of works by the sculptor David d'Angers , who was a native of the town .
In the middle of a main boulevard near the museum stands his bronze statue of René of Anjou , who was born in the chateau of Angers .
The Hôtel de Pincé or d'Anjou ( 1523-1530 ) is the finest of the stone mansions of Angers .
There are also many curious wooden houses of the fifteenth and 16th centuries .
The Palais de Justice , the Catholic Institute , a fine theater , and a hospital with 1500 beds are the more remarkable of the modern buildings of the town .
Angers is the seat of a bishopric , dating from the 3rd century ; a prefecture ; a court of appeal ; and a court of assizes ( criminal courts ) .
It has a tribunal of first instance , a tribunal of commerce , a board of trade-arbitrators , a chamber of commerce , a branch of the Bank of France , and several learned societies .
The early prosperity of the town is largely due to the nearby quarries of slate , whose abundant use for the roofs of Angers led to the city 's nickname , the `` Black City '' ( or `` La ville noire '' , in French ) .
As of 1911 , existing industries noted in the Encyclopædia Britannica for that year included the distillation of liqueurs from fruit ( Cointreau , a brand of triple sec orange liqueur , is produced to this day in Saint-Barthélemy-d'Anjou , a suburb of Angers ) ; cable , rope , and thread-making ; the manufacture of boots , shoes , umbrellas , and parasols ; weaving of sail-cloth and fabrics ; machine construction ; wire-drawing ; and the manufacture of sparkling wines and preserved fruits .
The chief articles of commerce , besides slate and manufactured goods , were hemp , early vegetables , fruit , flowers , and live-stock .
Many of these industries in 1911 have since disappeared , though Cointreau continues to produce liqueur .
Other contemporary industries include the manufacturing of lorries ( Scania ) and computers ( Bull , Packard-Bell , NEC ) as well as research in horticulture and biotechnologies .
Angers is connected by A11 autoroute to Paris ( c. 295 km ) and to Nantes ( c. 90 km ) .
Gare d'Angers-Saint-Laud railway station has a direct TGV service to Paris ( 1 hour 35 minutes ) .
The nearest airport is Angers - Loire Airport .
In 1850 a catastrophic failure of the Angers Bridge caused the deaths of over 200 soldiers .
The disaster inhibited the construction of suspension bridges in France for two decades .
Angers inaugurated a new light rail system on 25 June 2011 .
The tramway consists of one 12 km ( 7.46 mi ) line with 25 stops .
The line runs from Avrillé-Ardenne in the North to Angers-Roseraie in the south .
Service is provided by Keolis using 17 Alstom Citadis trams .
Angers has an orchestra , ONPL ( Orchestre National des Pays de la Loire ) , shared with Nantes , a local theater NTA ( Nouveau Théatre d'Angers ) and a dance school CNDC ( Centre National de Danse Contemporaine ) .
Angers has a few important museums on the national level : `` Musée des Beaux-Arts '' ( Art & Sculpture , the permanent collections : 14th to the present ) has just reopened , after five years of work .
`` Galerie David d'Angers '' , which is consecrated to the 19th century sculptor David d'Angers .
`` Musée Pincé '' , which holds a collection of Classical art , as well as Egyptian , Etruscan , Japanese and Chinese .
`` Musée Jean Lurçat et de la Tapisserie contemporaine '' , is a tapestry museum .
The famous tapestry series `` Le chant du Monde '' by Jean Lurçat is in the ancient Hôpital St-Jean , the oldest hospital in France , while another modern building holds the contemporary collections , and also other works by Jean Lurçat .
The Apocalypse Tapestry , or `` the tapestries of the Apocalypse '' , originally made for Louis I d'Anjou in the fourteenth century , are today in the Château d'Angers after their restoration .
Muséum d'histoire naturelle d'Angers is an important natural history museum in the `` Hôtel Demarie-Valentin '' , dating from 1521 .
Angers is an important center for tapestries , especially contemporary tapestry .
It calls itself the `` most flowered city in Europe '' , and its displays of live and cut flowers are stunning .
The city 's Jardin des Plantes d'Angers and Jardin botanique de la Faculté de Pharmacie d'Angers are a historic botanical gardens , and its Arboretum Gaston Allard is a major arboretum .
It is also well known for being the seat of important cultural events , such as the film festival Premiers Plans , Tour de Scènes ( free concerts in the streets ) and Les Accroche-Coeurs ( free street festival ) .
Angers has many sport teams playing at top levels : Angers SCO is Angers 's football team .
The club was created in 1919 .
In 2010-11 season , Angers SCO is playing in the Ligue 2 ( second division ) league .
Les Ducs d'Angers is Angers 's ice hockey team .
The club is playing in the Magnus League ( first division ) .
Anjou BC is Angers 's basketball team , playing in second division .
Angers acts as home to the Angers Aviron Nautique ( In French ) , a rowing club which actively competes in regattas across France .
A center of learning , Angers boasts two renowned universities and several specialized institutions , altogether responsible for more than 26,000 students .
The city has a Catholic university , the Université Catholique de L'Ouest ( Catholic University of the West , or UCO ) , one of five Catholic universities in France .
UCO is best known for its French language studies institute , the Centre international d'étude de la langue française ( CIDEF ) , which provides college students from around the world with college-level course instruction in the French language .
The town is also home to a state university , the University of Angers .
Angers 's other educational institutions include lycées ; training colleges , an engineering school in manufacturing ( ENSAM ) , an engineering school in electronics and computer science ( ESEO ) , and a school of fine art .
Its education and research institutes are the driving force behind the city 's science and technology industries .
Angers 's Business School is ESSCA ( Ecole Superieure des Sciences Commerciales d'Angers ) .
Formerly part of the UCO , the school 's Masters program is of a duration of five years .
ESSCA is recruiting students after the Baccalaureat .
In addition to French schools and universities , an American university St. Edward 's University has new expanding campus in Angers .
St. Edward 's University is a diverse , Catholic liberal arts institution from Austin , TX .
The university has a partnership with UCO , and offers a variety of courses of undergraduate level and professional training .
The city operates the Toussaint Main Library and nine branch libraries .
The city is the birthplace of : René I of Naples ( 1409-1480 ) Jean Bodin ( 1529-1596 ) , philosopher and jurist , author of Six Livres de la République .
Michel Eugène Chevreul , ( 1786-1889 ) , chemist .
Joseph Louis Proust , ( 1754-1826 ) , chemist responsible for `` Proust 's law '' Pierre-Jean David d'Angers , ( 1788-1856 ) , sculptor .
Prosper Ménière ( 1799-1862 ) , physician .
Édouard Cointreau , ( 1849-1923 ) , creator of the `` Cointreau '' orange-flavoured liquor .
René Bazin ( 1853-1932 ) , writer and educator .
Fernand Charron ( 1866-1921 ) , one of the first cars constructors ( Octave Mirbeau dedicated to Charron La 628-E8 , 1907 ) .
André Bazin ( 1918-1958 ) , critic of the French New Wave .
Hervé Bazin ( 1911-1996 ) , writer .
Henri Dutilleux ( born 1916 ) , composer .
Joseph Wresinski ( born 1917 ) , humanitarian activist .
Paul Poupard ( born 1930 ) , Roman Catholic cardinal .
Jacques Loussier ( born 1934 ) , composer and jazz pianist .
Francis Le Jau , ( 1665-1717 ) , Anglican missionary to West Indies and South Carolina , worked for the humane treatment of slaves .
Nicolas Mahut ( born 1982 ) , tennis player .
Juliana Mialoundama , basketball player .
Eriq Ebouaney ( Born 1967 ) , actor .
Angers is twinned with : Haarlem , Netherlands , since 1964 .
Osnabrück , Germany , since 1964 .
Bamako , Mali , since 1974 .
Pisa , Italy , since 1982 .
Wigan , United Kingdom , since 1988 .
Södertälje , Sweden , since 1998 .
Seville , Spain , since 2000 .
Yantai , China , since 2006 .
Austin , Texas , USA , since 2011 .
