Aquarius is a mineral sports drink manufactured by The Coca-Cola Company .
It originated in , and was first introduced in 1983 in Japan as a grapefruit-flavored sports drink , as a response to a competitor 's brand of sports drink called Pocari Sweat .
It was introduced to Spain and Portugal in 1991 , and it became the official drink of the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona .
Currently , it is marketed in Belgium , Brazil , Hong Kong , Italy , Japan , Luxembourg , Macau , Morocco , Netherlands , Peru , Portugal , Spain and Taiwan and the majority of its consumers are non-athletes .
Aquarius is available in the following flavors : Carrot Orange , Citrus Blend , Grapefruit , Honey Lemon , Lemon , Orange , Watermelon and Coca-Cola .
The availability of these flavors changes from country to country .
In Malaysia , Maldives and Brazil , bottled water is also available under the Aquarius brand .
In Argentina , is also available under the brand of `` Aquarius by Cepita '' .
Cepita 's a Coca-Cola local juice based-product company .
Aquarius Pera ( Pear flavored ) Aquarius Manzana ( Apple flavored ) Aquarius Pomelo ( Grapefruit flavored ) Aquarius Uva ( Grape flavored ) Aquarius Naranja ( Orange flavored ) Aquarius Pomelo Rosado ( Pink Grapefruit flavored ) In Mexico , a sparkling water with a hint of flavors is available under the Aquarius brand .
Aquarius Sprite ( Lemon-Lime flavored ) Aquarius Fanta ( Orange flavored ) Aquarius Lift ( Apple flavored ) In Peru , `` Aquarius Frugos '' is sold nationwide in 500 ml plastic bottles in the flavors manzana ( apple ) , pera ( pear ) and pìña ( pineapple ) .
Aquarius Pera ( Pear flavored ) Aquarius Manzana ( Apple flavored ) Aquarius Piña ( Pineapple flavored ) Aquarius Naranja ( Orange flavored ) In the United States , Coca-Cola renamed their brand of spring water known as Spring !
to Aquarius Spring !
in 2009 ( originally known as Dannon spring water , it was first renamed Spring !
By Dannon and then just Spring !
after the Coca-Cola Company purchased the brand in 2005 ) .
